224CH APTER 9
You may remember from your
finance course a well-known model
called the capital asset pricing
model (CAPM). This model has
an important role to play in your
investing decisions because it cap-
tures the concept of a required
return for a stock. So the time has
come to bite the bullet and review
some theory regarding asset prices
and markets and consider the
CAPM once again. Knowing about
the required return will be impor-
tant when you start trying to value
common stocks, a topic that you
are almost ready to tackle. Further-
more, understanding how risk is
priced in financial markets can be
very valuable to an investor.
In the previous chapter, we dis-
cussed portfolio theory, which is
normative, describing how inves-
tors should act in selecting an opti-
mal portfolio of risky securities. In this chapter, we consider theories about asset
pricing. What happens if all investors seek portfolios of risky securities using the
Markowitz framework under idealized conditions? How will this affect equilibrium
security prices and returns? In other words, how does optimal diversification affect
the market prices of securities? Under these idealized conditions, what is the risk–
return trade-off that investors face? In general, we wish to examine models that
explain security prices under conditions of market equilibrium. These are asset
pricing models or models for the valuation of risky assets.
We devote most of our attention to capital market theory (CMT), which begins
where portfolio theory ends. CMT provides a model for pricing risky assets. 1 While
Capital Market Theory
and Asset Pricing Models
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Describe capital market theory as
an extension of portfolio theory.
• Distinguish between the capital
market line, which applies to effi-
cient portfolios, and the security
market line, which applies to all
portfolios as well as individual
securities.
• Explain beta and the capital asset
pricing model (CAPM) and use
CAPM to calculate the required
rate of return for a security.
• Discuss the alternative theories of
how assets are priced, the arbi-
trage pricing theory and multifactor
models.
1 See William Sharpe, “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk,”
The Journal of Finance, 19 (September 1964): 425–442.
Capital Market Theory 225
CMT has its shortcomings, in practice, CMT, in the form of CAPM, remains the
most relied upon asset pricing model.
Capital Market Theory
Capital market theory (CMT) is a positive theory as it hypothesizes how investors
behave rather than how investors should behave, as in the case of modern portfolio
theory (MPT). It is reasonable to view CMT as an extension of portfolio theory, but
it is important to understand that MPT is not based on the validity, or lack thereof,
of CMT.
The specific equilibrium model of interest to many investors is the capital asset
pricing model, typically referred to as the CAPM. It allows us to assess the relevant
risk of an individual security and the relationship between risk and expected return.
The CAPM is attractive as an equilibrium model because of its simplicity and its
implications. As a result of serious challenges to the model, however, several alterna-
tive models have been developed. The primary alternatives to the CAPM are arbi-
trage pricing theory (APT) and other multifactor models.
The output from an asset pricing model, whether it be the CAPM or a multifac-
tor model, is an asset’s expected or required return. In an efficient market (and we
assume that financial markets are generally efficient), an asset’s expected return
and its required return are equivalent. That is, on average, investors expect to earn
returns on assets that are commensurate with the risk of those assets; their expected
return is their required return.
Therefore, in this text and other finance texts, you will see the output from asset
pricing models labeled as either expected or required return; the two terms are
used interchangeably. It is important to note, however, that individuals will develop
their own expectations, which may differ from the market equilibrium. To differ-
entiate an individual’s expected return from the expected return derived from an
asset pricing model, we follow the convention of labeling an individual’s return
expectation as the individual’s “estimated” return.
Capital Market Theory Assumptions
CMT involves a set of predictions concerning equilibrium expected (required)
returns on risky assets. It typically is derived by making some simplifying assump-
tions in order to facilitate the analysis and help us to more easily understand the
arguments without fundamentally changing the predictions of asset pricing theory.
CMT builds on Markowitz portfolio theory. Each investor is assumed to diversify
his or her portfolio according to the Markowitz model, choosing a location on the
efficient frontier that matches his or her risk–return preferences. Because of the
complexity of the real world, additional assumptions are made to make individuals
more alike:
1. All investors can borrow or lend money at the risk-free rate of return (desig-
nated RF in this text).
2. All investors have identical probability distributions for future returns; they
have homogeneous expectations with respect to the three inputs of the port-
folio model: expected returns, variance of returns, and the correlation matrix.
Therefore, given a set of security prices and a risk-free rate (RF), all investors
use the same information to generate an efficient frontier.
Homogeneous Expecta-
tions Investors have the
same expectations regard-
ing the expected return
and risk of securities
226 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
3. All investors have the same one-period time horizon.
4. There are no transaction costs.
5. There are no personal income taxes—investors are indifferent between capi-
tal gains and dividends.
6. There is no inflation.
7. There are many investors, and no single investor can affect the price of a
stock through his or her trading decisions. Investors are price takers and act
as if prices are unaffected by their own trades.
8. Capital markets are in equilibrium.
Realism of the assumptions These assumptions appear unrealistic and often
disturb investors encountering CMT for the first time. However, the important issue
is how well the theory predicts or describes reality and not the realism of its assump-
tions. If CMT does a good job of explaining the returns on risky assets, it is very use-
ful and the assumptions made in deriving the theory are of less importance. Later in
this chapter, we discuss the development of the CAPM and its implications. We also
gauge the usefulness of the CAPM in asset pricing, which is the primary practical
outcome of CMT.
Most of the above assumptions can be relaxed without significant effects on the
CAPM or its implications; in other words, the CAPM is robust. 2 Although the results
from such a relaxation of the assumptions may be less clear-cut and precise, no sig-
nificant damage is done. Many conclusions of the basic model still hold.
Finally, most investors recognize that all of the assumptions of CMT are not
unrealistic. For example, some institutional investors such as pension funds are
tax-exempt, and brokerage costs today, as a percentage of the transaction, are very
small. Nor is it too unreasonable to assume that for the model’s one-period horizon,
inflation may be fully (or mostly) anticipated and, therefore, not a major factor.
Introduction of the Risk-Free Asset
The first assumption of CMT is that investors can borrow and lend at the risk-free
rate (RF). Although the introduction of a risk-free asset appears to be a simple step
to take in the evolution of portfolio theory, it is a very significant step. In fact, it is
the introduction of RF that allows us to develop CMT from portfolio theory.
Defining a risk-free asset A risk-free asset can be defined as one with a certain-to-
be- earned expected return and a variance of return of zero. Since variance = 0, RF
in each period will equal its expected value. Furthermore, the covariance between
RF and the return to any risky asset i will be zero.
The true risk-free asset is best thought of as a Treasury security, which has little or
no practical risk of default. The Treasury security should have a maturity matching
the holding period of the investor. To make the investment risk-free, the amount of
money to be received at the end of the holding period must be known with certainty
at the beginning of the period. A Treasury note is typically taken to be the risk-free
asset, and its rate of return is referred to throughout this text as RF.
In practice, the yield on five-year Treasury notes is commonly used for RF, and
we follow this convention throughout this text. In asset pricing, the investor is
weighing a choice between purchasing the risk-free asset versus an investment in
risky assets. While an investor’s actual holding period is generally uncertain at the
time an investment is made, the decision to purchase is frequently viewed as attrac-
tive for a long-term commitment of funds. Therefore, the ex ante holding period at
the time of investment can be viewed as long term.
There is, however, some difference of opinion whether the appropriate proxy for
the risk-free asset is a short- or long-term Treasury security. The use of a long-term
Treasury rate for RF has been increasing in popularity because of the tendency
for T-bill yields, at times, to reflect what many would consider as unrealistic rates.
In particular, due to Federal Reserve manipulation in the short-term market,
the T-bill yield has been driven to nearly zero in recent times. For example, one-year
T-bills were yielding only 0.08 percent in May 2014 versus a yield of 1.65 percent for
five- year Treasuries.
Risk-Free Borrowing and Lending
Assume that the efficient frontier, as shown by the arc AB in Figure 9.1, has been
derived by an investor. The arc AB delineates the set of efficient portfolios as
explained in Chapter 8. (For simplicity, assume these are portfolios of common
stocks.) We now introduce a risk-free asset with return RF and standard deviation
(σ) = 0.
RF plots on the vertical axis because the risk is zero. Investors can combine this
riskless asset with the efficient set of portfolios on the efficient frontier. By drawing
a line between RF and various risky portfolios on the efficient frontier, we can exam-
ine combinations of risk–return possibilities that did not exist previously.
Lending possibilities In Figure 9.1, a new line could be drawn between RF and
the Markowitz efficient frontier above point X, for example, connecting RF to
point V. Each successively higher line will dominate the preceding set of port-
folios. This process ends when a line is drawn tangent to the efficient set of risky
portfolios, given a vertical intercept of RF. In Figure 9.1, we call this tangency
Expected return
Risk
RF A
B
Y
X
V
M
Z
FIGURE 9.1 The Markowitz efficient frontier and the possibilities resulting from introducing
a risk-free asset
228 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
point M. The set of portfolio opportunities on this line (RF to M) dominates all
portfolios below it.
The straight line from RF to the efficient frontier at point M, RF-M, dominates all
straight lines below it and contains the superior lending portfolios given the Markow-
itz efficient set. Lending refers to the purchase of a riskless asset such as Treasury
securities because by making such a purchase the investor is lending money to the
issuer of the securities, the U.S. government. We can think of this risk-free lending
simply as risk-free investing.
Borrowing possibilities What if we extend this analysis to allow investors to bor-
row money? The investor can now invest more in risky assets than the amount of
his or her wealth. Technically, the investor is short selling the riskless asset. One
way to accomplish this borrowing is to buy stocks on margin, which is currently
constrained to an initial margin requirement of 50 percent. We will assume that
investors can also borrow at RF. 3 This assumption can be removed without changing
the basic arguments.
Borrowing additional investable funds and investing them together with
the investor’s own wealth allows investors to attain higher expected returns
while assuming greater risk. These borrowed funds can be used to leverage the
portfolio position beyond point M. As in the lending discussion, point M repre-
sents 100 percent of an investor’s wealth in the risky-asset portfolio M. The straight
line RF-M is now extended upward, as shown in Figure 9.2, and can be designated
RF-M-L.
The market portfolio Portfolio M in Figure 9.2 is called the market portfolio of
risky securities. It is the highest point of tangency between RF and the efficient fron-
tier and is the optimal risky portfolio. All investors want to be on the optimal line
RF-M-L. Unless they invested 100 percent of their wealth in the risk-free asset, they
Market Portfolio The
portfolio of all risky assets,
with each asset weighted
by the ratio of its market
value to the market value
of all risky assets
Expected return
RF A
L
M
B
Risk = σ
FIGURE 9.2 The efficient frontier when lending and borrowing possibilities are allowed
would own portfolio M with some portion of their investable wealth, or they would
invest their own wealth plus borrowed funds in portfolio M.
• Portfolio M is the optimal portfolio of risky assets.4
Why do all investors hold identical risky portfolios? Based on our previous
assumptions, all investors use the same Markowitz analysis on the same set of securi-
ties, have the same expected returns and covariances, and have an identical time
horizon. Therefore, they arrive at the same optimal risky portfolio, and it is the
market portfolio, designated M.
It is critical to note that although investors take different positions on the straight
line in Figure 9.2, all investors invest in portfolio M, which consists of all risky assets
in existence. If the optimal portfolio did not include a particular asset, the price
of this asset would decline until it became an attractive investment opportunity. At
some point, investors would purchase it, and it would be included in the market
portfolio. Because the market portfolio includes all risky assets, portfolio M is com-
pletely diversified. Portfolio M contains only market (systematic) risk, which, even with
perfect diversification, cannot be eliminated because it is the result of macroeco-
nomic factors that affect the value of all securities.
The market portfolio is often proxied by the portfolio of all common stocks,
which, in turn, is proxied by a market index such as the Standard & Poor’s 500
Index. Therefore, to facilitate this discussion, think of portfolio M as a broad mar-
ket index such as the S&P 500. The market portfolio is a risky portfolio because it
consists of risky common stocks, and its risk is designated as σM .
Checking Your Understanding
1. Why is the introduction of risk-free borrowing and lending such an important
change relative to where the Markowitz analysis left off?
The Capital Market Line
The straight line shown in Figure 9.2, which traces out the risk–return trade-off for
efficient portfolios, is tangent to the Markowitz efficient frontier at point M and
has a vertical intercept RF. This straight line is called the capital market line (CML)
and it represents the best obtainable efficient set. All investors will hold portfolio
M as their optimal risky portfolio and will be somewhere on this trade-off line. The
CML represents those combinations of risk-free investing/borrowing and portfolio
M that yield the highest expected return obtainable for a given level of risk.
Let’s summarize what we have learned so far:
1. A risk-averse investor makes investment decisions based on Markowitz princi-
ples. Such investors select efficient portfolios of risky assets.
4 All assets are included in portfolio M in proportion to their market value. For example, if the market
value of IBM constitutes 2 percent of the market value of all risky assets, IBM will constitute 2 percent of
the market value of portfolio M. In theory, the market portfolio should include all risky assets worldwide,
both financial (bonds, options, futures, etc.) and real (gold, real estate, etc.), in their proper propor-
tions. By one estimate, the value of non-U.S. assets exceeds 60 percent of the world total, and U.S. equi-
ties make up only about 10 percent of total world assets. Therefore, international diversification is clearly
important. A worldwide portfolio, if it could be constructed, would be completely diversified. Of course,
the market portfolio is unobservable.
230 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
2. We then add the assumption that investors can borrow and lend freely
at RF.
3. Each investor then constructs an optimal portfolio that falls on the CML and
matches his or her preferred risk–return combination. Conservative investors
invest part of their portfolio in the risk-free asset (i.e., they lend), and aggres-
sive investors borrow.
4. All investors can construct an optimal portfolio by combining an efficient
portfolio, M, with a risk-free asset. The result is the CML, a straight line in
expected return, standard deviation space.
Defining the Capital Market Line
The capital market line (CML) depicts the equilibrium conditions that prevail in the
market for efficient portfolios consisting of the optimal portfolio of risky assets and the
risk-free asset. All combinations of the risk-free asset and the risky portfolio M are
on the CML, and, in equilibrium, all investors end up with a portfolio somewhere
on the CML based on their risk tolerance.
The Separation Theorem
We have established that each investor holds combinations of the risk-free asset and
the market portfolio M. Further, under the assumptions of capital market theory
(CMT), all investors agree on RF. Therefore, the linear efficient set shown in
Figure 9.2 applies to all investors.
Borrowing and lending possibilities, combined with one portfolio of risky assets,
M, offer an investor whatever risk–expected return combination he or she seeks;
that is, investors can be anywhere they choose on this line, depending on their risk–
return preferences. An investor could:
a. Invest 100 percent of investable funds in the risk-free asset, providing an
expected return of RF and zero risk
b. Invest 100 percent of investable funds in risky-asset portfolio M, offering
E(RM), with its risk σM
c. Invest in any combination of risk and return between these two points,
obtained by varying the proportion wRF invested in the risk-free asset
d. Invest more than 100 percent of investable funds in portfolio M by borrow-
ing money at RF, thereby increasing both the expected return and the risk
beyond that offered by portfolio M
Different investors will choose different portfolios because of their risk prefer-
ences (they have different indifference curves), but they will choose the same com-
bination of risky securities, M. Investors will then borrow or lend to achieve various
positions on the linear trade-off between risk and expected return.
Unlike the Markowitz analysis, it is not necessary to match each client’s indif-
ference curves with a particular efficient portfolio because only one efficient
portfolio is held by all investors. Rather, each client will use his or her indiffer-
ence curves to determine where along the new efficient frontier RF-M-L he or
she should be. In effect, each client must determine how much of investable
funds should be lent or borrowed at RF and how much should be invested in
portfolio M
232 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
The slope of the CML is the market price of risk for efficient portfolios. It is also
called the equilibrium market price of risk. It indicates the additional return that
the market demands for each percentage increase in a portfolio’s risk.
The Equation for the CML
We now know the intercept and slope of the CML. Since the CML is the trade-off
between risk and expected return for efficient portfolios, and risk is measured by
the standard deviation, the equation for the CML is shown as Equation 9-1:
E R E R
p
M
M
pRF RF (9-1)
where
E Rp( ) the expected return on any efficient portfolio on thee CML
the return on the risk-free asset
the expect
RF
E RM( ) eed return on the market portfolio
the standard deviat
M
M iion of the returns on the market portfolio
the standardP deviation of the efficient portfolio being considered
In words, the expected (required) return for any portfolio on the CML is equal
to the risk-free rate plus a risk premium. The risk premium is the product of the
market price of risk and the amount of risk for the portfolio under consideration.
Important Points About the CML
The following points should be noted about the CML:
1. Only efficient portfolios consisting of the risk-free asset and portfolio M lie
on the CML. Portfolio M contains all securities weighted by their respective
market values—it is the optimum combination of risky securities and is, by
definition, an efficient portfolio. The risk-free asset has no risk. Therefore, all
combinations of these two assets are efficient portfolios.
M
L
Risk premium for the market portfolio M = E(RM) – RF
Risk = standard deviation
RF
Risk of market
portfolio M, σM
σM
E(R M)
Expected portfolio return
Slope of CML = σM
E(R M) – RF
FIGURE 9.4 The capital market line and its components
234 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
• Beta measures the risk of an individual stock relative to the market portfolio
of all stocks.
Beta is a measure of the sensitivity of a stock’s return to the returns of the mar-
ket. A security that tends to move in the same direction as the market but typically
moves more than the market has a beta greater than 1.0 and is considered to have
above-average risk. For example, a security whose returns rise or fall on average
15 percent when the market rises or falls 10 percent has a beta of 1.5 and is consid-
ered relatively high risk. Likewise, a security that typically moves in the same direc-
tion as the market but moves less than the market has a beta less than 1.0 and has
below-average risk. For example, a security that generally moves 6 percent in direct
correspondence with a market move of 10 percent has a beta of 0.6 and has below-
average risk. The average beta, which is frequently also called the market beta, is 1.0.
Since beta measures comovement with the market, the comovement of the market
with the market must be 1.0. Figure 9.5 shows return plots of three different securi-
ties relative to the market return.
Above- and Below-Average Beta Stocks
You may be wondering what types of stocks have high versus low betas. The follow-
ing categories should help you in your efforts to classify stocks:
Beta: 0 < β < 1: Below-average risk stocks. Sometimes referred to as defensive
stocks. Typically includes firms producing products that are necessities.
Security return
Market return
A = 1.5
β
= 1.0
β
= 0.6
β
B
C
FIGURE 9.5 Illustrative betas of 1.5 (A), 1.0 (B), and 0.6 (C)
In Figure 9.5, Security A’s beta of 1.5 indicates that, on
average, A’s returns exhibit 1.5 times the average sensitivity
to market return changes, both up and down. A security whose returns rise or
fall on average 15 percent when the market return rises or falls 10 percent is said
to be an aggressive, or risky, security. If the line is less steep than the 45-degree
line, beta is less than 1.0; this indicates that on average, a stock’s returns have
less sensitivity than average to market moves. For example, Security C’s beta of
0.6 indicates that stock returns move up or down, on average, only 60 percent
as much as the market as a whole.
EXAMPLE 9.2
Systematic Risk and Beta 235
Example stocks include the stocks of public utilities, healthcare, and con-
sumer staple firms.
Beta: β > 1: Above-average risk stocks. Sometimes referenced as cyclical stocks.
Typically includes firms offering products or services that are purchased
with discretionary income. Example stocks include the stocks of technology,
consumer discretionary, capital goods manufacturers, and financial firms.
Beta: β < 0: These assets have very low risk; however, very few stocks fall in this
category. Example assets include derivative securities (e.g., put options) and
assets tied to commodity prices (particularly precious metals prices).
Some reported betas The following table reports betas, as of February 2019, for
a variety of well-known firms. Separate the firms into two groups, those that offer
products and services that are commonly considered staples or necessities versus
those firms offering products and services purchased with discretionary funds (i.e.,
luxury products/services). Do you notice anything about the difference in the betas
across these two groups?
Company Beta
Bank of America (BAC) 1.56
Fiat Chrysler (FCAU) 1.99
Merck & Co. (MRK) 0.38
Wal-Mart Stores (WMT) 0.64
McDonald’s (MCD) 0.40
Micron Technology (MU) 1.28
American Electric Power (AEP) 0.24
Tiffany & Co. (TIF) 1.32
Royal Caribbean Cruises (RCL) 1.97
Source: Yahoo Finance.
Remember that beta measures the performance of a security relative to the mar-
ket performance. Those firms that are most reliant on strong market conditions for
their own success have the highest betas, while those firms that are relatively invari-
ant to market conditions have the lowest betas.
In Summary, What is Beta?
We will start by indicating what beta is not, that is, beta is not a measure of asset
volatility. Many individuals that know a little about beta are convinced that beta
measures an asset’s volatility. This, however, is an incorrect view of beta. While high-
beta stocks and low-beta stocks generally also have high volatility and low volatil-
ity, respectively, there are notable exceptions. For example, investments in firms
engaged in precious metal mining or drug research typically have relatively volatile
stock prices; however, their stock prices are generally relatively insensitive to market
moves. Thus, the standard deviation of stock returns for these firms is typically rela-
tively high, while their betas are generally relatively low.
The key is determining the most prominent underlying factor that drives stock
returns. If the most prominent factor is general market conditions, then beta and
volatility will align with each other; however, if the most prominent factor is some-
thing other than general market conditions (e.g., a major gold discovery, a drug
breakthrough, or a substantial move in gold price), then beta and volatility may
differ substantially from one another.
236 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
The following list contains alternative definitions of beta. Beta is:
1. A measure of an asset’s comovement with the market (M)
2. A measure of an asset’s sensitivity to market moves
3. The slope of the line formed when an asset’s returns are plotted relative to
the market return
4. The relevant risk measure for well-diversified investors
5. A measure of the risk that an asset will add to a well-diversified portfolio
6. A measure of systematic (or market, or nondiversifiable) risk
Estimating Beta
The market model is an equation that relates an asset’s returns to the market return.
The market model equation is expressed as
R R ei i i M i (9-2)
where
R i
R
i
M
the return on security
the return on the market indeex
the intercept term
the slope term
the random res
i
i
ie iidual error
To estimate the market model, the return for stock i is regressed on the corre-
sponding return for the market index. Estimates are obtained for αi (the constant
return on security i that is earned regardless of the level of market returns) and βi
(the slope coefficient that indicates the expected change in security i’s return for
a 1 percent increase in market return). The slope coefficient from estimating the
market model represents a stock’s beta. Estimating the market model with a regres-
sion is the process that is generally followed in deriving stock betas. However, it is
also possible to calculate beta using the formula we presented earlier:
i
i M
M
COV ,
2
When the returns for a stock are plotted against the market index returns, the
regression line fitted to these points is referred to as the characteristic line. Coca-
Cola’s characteristic line is shown in Figure 9.6.
The alpha is the intercept of the characteristic line on the vertical axis and,
in theory, should equal RF for any stock. It measures the return for a stock when
the return for the market portfolio is zero. The beta coefficient is the slope of the
Market Model Relates the
return on each stock to
the return on the market,
using a linear relationship
with intercept and slope
Characteristic Line A
regression equation used
to estimate beta by regress-
ing stock returns on
market returns
To illustrate the estimation of the market model, we use
return data for the Coca-Cola company (ticker symbol
“KO”). Fitting a regression equation to 60 months of return data along with
corresponding returns for the S&P 500, the estimated equation is:
R RKO 0 008 0 528 500. . &S P
EXAMPLE 9.3
Systematic Risk and Beta 237
characteristic line. It measures the sensitivity of a stock’s return to that of the market
portfolio.
The variance of the error term measures the variability of a stock’s return not
associated with movements in the market’s return. This variance represents diver-
sifiable or unsystematic risk, and hence, diversification can reduce this variability.
Many brokerage houses and investment advisory services report betas as part of
the total information given for individual stocks. For example, the Yahoo Finance
website reports the beta for each stock covered, as do brokerage firms such as Mer-
rill Lynch. Both measures of risk discussed above, standard deviation and beta, are
widely known and discussed by investors.
The values of αi and βi (beta) obtained by estimating the market model regres-
sion are estimates of the true parameters and are subject to error. Furthermore,
beta can shift over time as a company’s situation changes. A legitimate question,
therefore, is how accurate are the estimates of beta?
There are several points you should keep in mind when considering betas and
the characteristic line:
1. We are trying to estimate the future beta for a security, which may differ from
the historical beta.
2. In theory, the independent variable RM represents the return for the total of
all marketable assets in the economy. This is typically approximated with a
stock market index, which, in turn, is an approximation of the return on all
common stocks.
3. The characteristic line can be fitted over varying numbers of observations
and time periods. There is no one correct period or number of observations
for calculating beta. As a result, estimates of beta vary. For example, The Value
Line Investment Survey calculates betas from weekly rates of return for five
years, whereas other analysts often use monthly rates of return over a compa-
rable period.
238 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
4. The regression estimates of α and β from the characteristic line are only esti-
mates of the true α and β and are subject to error. Thus, these estimates may
differ from the true α and β.
5. As the fundamental variables (e.g., earnings) of a company change, beta
should change; that is, the beta is not perfectly stationary over time. This issue
is important enough to be considered separately.
Blume found that in comparing nonoverlapping seven-year periods for portfo-
lios of various sizes the following observations could be made5
:
1. Betas estimated for individual securities are not stable; that is, they contain
relatively little information about future betas.
2. Betas estimated for large portfolios are stable; that is, they contain much
information about future betas.
In effect, a large portfolio (e.g., 50 stocks) provides stability because of the aver-
aging effect. Although the betas of some stocks in the portfolio go up from period
to period, others go down, and these two movements tend to cancel each other.
Furthermore, the errors involved in estimating betas tend to cancel out in a portfo-
lio. Therefore, estimates of portfolio betas show less change from period to period
and are much more reliable than are the betas estimated for individual securities.
Researchers have found that betas in the forecast period are, on average, closer
to 1.0 than the estimate obtained using historical data. In other words, betas tend
to regress toward the mean. This would imply that we can improve the estimates of
beta by measuring the adjustment in one period and using it as an estimate of the
adjustment in the next period. For example, Blume’s adjustment for the tendency
for betas to regress toward the mean uses the following formula:
adjusted measured0 333 0 667. .
This simple adjustment approach is employed by many investment firms; how-
ever, other firms rely on more sophisticated methods, including Bayesian estimation
techniques.
Concepts in Action
Beta Management and Risk-On, Risk-Off
Beta represents a key concept in investment
management. As a measure of systematic risk,
beta relates a stock’s or portfolio’s performance
to the overall market. A diversified portfolio with
a beta of 1.0 should perform like the overall
market, which by definition has a beta of 1.0.
A portfolio with a beta greater than 1.0 has
greater than average sensitivity to market returns,
while a portfolio with a beta less than 1.0 has
less than average sensitivity. Beta management
involves adjusting the beta of the portfolio to take
advantage of expected market conditions. If the
market is expected to perform well (poorly), the
manager adjusts the portfolio’s beta up (down)
to take advantage of the projected market
performance. In recent periods, this approach
has commonly been referenced as a risk-on,
risk-off strategy. Based on a risk-on, risk-off strategy,
managers use economic conditions, or fre-
quently Fed policy changes, to determine when
to ramp a portfolio’s risk up or down. During
the financial crisis of 2008, a risk-off (low-beta)
position was popular, while risk-on (high-beta)
became attractive with the subsequent market
recove
The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) 239
The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
The CML depicts the risk–return trade-off in equilibrium. However, it applies only
to efficient portfolios and cannot be used to assess the equilibrium expected return
for a single security. What about individual securities or inefficient portfolios? That’s
where the CAPM enters the picture.
Under the CAPM, all investors hold the market portfolio, which is the bench-
mark portfolio against which other portfolios are measured. How does an individual
security contribute to the risk of the market portfolio? As we discussed in the previ-
ous section, beta measures this risk contribution.
Investors should expect a risk premium for buying a risky asset, such as a stock.
The greater the riskiness of that stock, the higher the risk premium. Assuming inves-
tors hold well-diversified portfolios, they will be interested in portfolio risk rather
than individual security risk. Different stocks affect a well-diversified portfolio dif-
ferently. The relevant risk for an individual stock is its contribution to the riskiness
of a well-diversified portfolio, which is measured by beta. And the risk of a well-
diversified portfolio is market risk, or systematic risk, which is nondiversifiable.
We know that investors should hold diversified portfolios to reduce portfolio risk.
When an investor adds a security to a large portfolio, what matters is the security’s
average comovement with the other securities in the portfolio, that is, its beta. We
also now know that under CMT all investors hold the same portfolio of risky assets,
the market portfolio. Therefore, the risk that matters when we consider any security
is its beta.
• The major conclusion of the CAPM is as follows: The relevant risk of any secu-
rity is the amount of risk that security contributes to a well-diversified portfo-
lio, that is, its beta.
The CAPM’s expected return–beta relationship The Security Market Line
(SML) is the graphical depiction of the CAPM equation. The SML depicts the rela-
tionship between risk and expected return for any asset, security, or portfolio. The
CAPM posits a linear relationship between an asset’s risk and its expected return.
The security market line (SML) is shown in Figure 9.7. Required (expected) return
is on the vertical axis and beta, the measure of risk, is on the horizontal axis.6 The
slope of the SML is the difference between the required return on the market index
and RF.
Security Market Line
(SML) The graphical
depiction of the CAPM
Investments Intuition
Investors first exposed to the concepts of beta
and CAPM may hear someone say that high-
beta stocks held last year produced a lower
return than did low-beta stocks, and therefore
something is wrong with this concept. This is a
fallacy, however, because the CAPM relationship
is an equilibrium relationship expected to prevail
in the long run. High-beta stocks have greater
risk than low-beta stocks and are expected to
produce higher returns. However, they will not typ-
ically produce higher returns every period and
over all intervals of time. If they did, they would
be less risky than low-beta stocks, not more risky.
The correct statement is that over long periods
of time, high-beta stocks should produce higher
average returns.
6 In equilibrium the expected and required rates of return are the same for a security.
240 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) formally relates the expected (required)
return for any security or portfolio with the relevant risk measure. The CAPM’s
expected return–beta relationship is the most often cited form of the relationship.
Beta measures the risk that cannot be diversified away in a portfolio of securities
and, as such, is the measure that investors should consider in their portfolio man-
agement decision process.
The CAPM in its expected return–beta relationship form is a simple but ele-
gant statement. It says that the expected return on an asset is a function of two
components—the risk-free rate and the risk premium:
E R
E R
i
i M
( )
( )
Risk-free rate Risk premium
RF RF
(9-3)
where
E R i
E R
i
M
( ) ( )
( )
the required expected return on asset
the exxpected required return on the market
the marke
( )
( )E R RFM tt risk premium
the beta coefficient for asseti i
The simplicity of the CAPM is reflected in the following discussion. When
considering an investment, an investor always has the option of purchasing the
Capital Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM) Relates
the required (expected)
return for any security
with the risk for that secu-
rity as measured by beta
0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Risk (Beta)
BetaM
B
C
Assets more
risky than the
market index
Assets less
risky than the
market index
Required rate of return (k)
A
2.0
kM
k RF
FIGURE 9.7 The security market line (SML)
Investments Intuition
As expected, Figure 9.7 demonstrates that if
investors are to seek higher expected returns,
they must assume greater risk. The trade-off
between expected (required) return and risk
must always be positive. In equilibrium, inves-
tors require a minimum expected return before
they will invest in a particular security. That is,
given its risk, a security must offer some minimum
expected return before an investor can be per-
suaded to purchase it. Thus, in discussing the SML
concept, we are simultaneously talking about
required and expected return.
The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) 241
risk- free asset and earning RF. What then entices the investor to purchase a risky
asset instead? The risky asset must offer a risk premium above RF. How is an asset’s
risk premium determined? An asset’s risk premium is based on the asset’s amount of
risk, which is measured by beta, and the compensation the market pays for bearing
a unit of risk, which is measured by the market risk premium. Thus, beta represents
an asset’s amount of risk and the market risk premium reflects the price of risk.
From our previous discussion, we established that beta is the relevant measure of
risk because it indicates the amount of risk an asset will add to a well-diversified port-
folio. We now discuss the market risk premium, which reflects the market’s required
return for bearing a unit of risk (i.e., the price of risk).
The market risk premium is dependent on the risk aversion of investors as a
whole. The market risk premium also represents the slope of the SML. When aggre-
gate risk aversion increases, the price of bearing risk goes up and so does the slope
of the SML. For example, during the financial crisis in 2008, investor risk aversion
increased substantially and the market risk premium increased accordingly. Inves-
tors demanded much greater returns to move from the risk-free asset into risky
assets.
When aggregate risk aversion subsides, the price of bearing risk goes down along
with the slope of the SML. For example, in the years following the financial crisis
of 2008, the economy gradually improved and investor confidence increased. The
improved conditions lessened investor risk aversion and reduced the slope of the
SML. The result was that it required a smaller premium to entice investors to invest
in risky assets.
The CAPM’s expected return–beta relationship is a simple but elegant statement
about expected (required) return and risk for any security or portfolio. It formalizes
the basis of investments, which is that the greater the risk assumed, the greater the
expected return. This relationship states that an investor requires a return on a risky
asset equal to the return on a risk-free asset plus a risk premium, and the greater the
risk assumed, the greater the risk premium.
The required (or expected) return for IBM is larger than that of the market
because IBM’s beta is larger.
Market Risk Premium
The difference between
expected return for
equities and RF
Investments Intuition
The CAPM indicates that securities with betas
greater than the market beta of 1.0 have larger
risk premiums than that of the average stock
and therefore, when added to RF, larger required
returns. This is exactly what investors should expect,
since beta is a measure of risk, and greater risk
should be accompanied by greater return. Con-
versely, securities with betas less than that of the
market are less risky and should have required
returns lower than that for the market as a whole.
Assume that the beta for IBM is 1.15. Also assume that RF
is 5 percent and that the expected return on the market
is 12 percent. The required return for IBM can be calculated as:
KIBM 0 05 1 15 0 12 0 05
13 05
. . ( . . )
. %
EXAMPLE 9.4
242 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
Over- and undervalued securities The SML has important implications for
security prices. In equilibrium, each security should lie on the SML because a secu-
rity’s expected return should be the return needed to compensate investors for the
security’s risk.
What happens if an investor determines that a security is not in equilibrium and
therefore does not lie on the SML? To make this determination, the investor must
employ a separate methodology to estimate the return for the security. In other
words, the investor derives an estimated return for a security and plots the security
relative to the SML. The investor may use some approach, such as fundamental
analysis to derive the security’s estimated return and then use the CAPM/SML to
derive the security’s required return. The investor believes that the security is tem-
porarily mispriced or in disequilibrium and will return at some point to equilib-
rium, that is, will eventually plot on the SML.
Alpha is the estimated return for a stock above or below the expected return
predicted by the CAPM. We can see this clearly in Figure 9.8. Alpha will be zero
for stocks that are fairly priced, that is, on the SML. According to the CAPM, the
expected value for alpha is zero for all securities that are in equilibrium.
n Figure 9.8, Investor G plots two securities relative to
the SML: Security X has a relatively high estimated return
derived from fundamental analysis and plots above the SML; Security Y has a
relatively low estimated return and plots below the SML. Based on Investor
G’s analysis, which is undervalued? Security X, plotting above the SML, is
undervalued because its estimated return is higher than required, given its
level of systematic risk. Investors require a return of E(RX
), but Security X,
according to Investor G’s fundamental analysis, is offering E(RXI). Investor G
should purchase Security X. If other investors recognize the same mispricing
as Investor G, they will do the following:
Purchase Security X, which will drive up its price as more of it is purchased.
Investor G gains as the price is driven up by other investor trading. The
expected return will be driven down, until it is at the level indicated by
the SML.
Now consider Security Y, which, according to Investor G’s fundamental
analysis, does not offer enough expected return given its level of systematic
risk. Investors require E(RY
) for Security Y, based on the SML, but Y offers only
E(RYI). Investor G should short sell Security Y. If other investors recognize the
same mispricing as Investor G, they will do the following:
Sell Security Y (or perhaps sell Y short), which increases the supply of Y and drives
down its price. Investor G gains as the price is driven down by the trading activ-
ity of the other investors. The expected return will be driven up for new buyers
because any dividends or price appreciation are now relative to a lower price. The
price will fall until the expected return rises enough to reach the SML and the
security is once again in equilibrium.
244 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
Tests of the CAPM
The conclusions of the CAPM are entirely sensible:
1. Expected return and risk are positively related—greater risk implies greater
expected return.
2. The relevant risk for a security is a measure of its effect on portfolio risk.
The question, therefore, is how well the theory works. After all, the assumptions
on which capital market theory (CMT) rest are, for the most part, unrealistic. To
assess the validity of this or any other theory, empirical tests must be performed. If
the CAPM is valid, and the market tends to balance out so that the model provides
reasonably accurate forecasts for security returns, equations of the following type
can be estimated:
R a ai i1 2 (9-4)
where
R ii the average return on security over some number of perriods
the estimated beta for securityi i
When Equation 9-4 is estimated, a1 should approximate the average RF during
the periods studied, and a2 should approximate the average market risk premium
during the periods studied.
An extensive literature exists involving tests of the CAPM. Although it is not possi-
ble to summarize the scope of this literature entirely and to reconcile findings from
different studies that seem to be in disagreement, the following points represent a
reasonable consensus of the empirical results7
:
1. The SML appears to be linear; that is, the trade-off between expected
(required) return and risk is an upward-sloping straight line.
2. The intercept term, a1
, is generally found to be higher than RF.
3. The slope of the CAPM, a2, is generally found to be less steep than posited by
the theory.
4. Although the evidence is mixed, no persuasive case has been made that
unsystematic risk commands a risk premium. In other words, investors are
rewarded only for assuming systematic risk.
The major problem in testing CAPM is that it is formulated on an ex ante basis
but can be tested only on an ex post basis. We can never know investor expectations
with certainty. Therefore, it should come as no surprise that tests of the model have
produced conflicting results in some cases and that the empirical results diverge
from the predictions of the model. In fact, it is amazing that the empirical results
support the basic CAPM as well as they do. Based on many studies, it appears that
the stock market prices securities on the basis of a linear relationship between sys-
tematic risk and return, with diversifiable (unsystematic) risk playing little or no
part in the pricing mechanism.
The CAPM has not been proved empirically, nor will it be. In fact, Roll has
argued that the CAPM is untestable because the market portfolio, which consists
7 For a discussion of empirical tests of the CAPM, see Elton, Gruber, Brown, and Goetzmann, Modern
Portfolio Theory and Investment Analysis, 9th ed. (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2014).
of all risky assets, is unobservable. 8 In effect, Roll argues that tests of the CAPM are
actually tests of the mean-variance efficiency of the market portfolio. Nevertheless,
the CAPM remains a logical way to view the risk-expected return trade-off and is a
frequently used model in finance.
Arbitrage Pricing Theory
The CAPM is not the only model of security pricing. Another model that has
received attention is based on arbitrage pricing theory (APT) as developed by Ross
and enhanced by others. In recent years, APT has emerged as an alternative theory
of asset pricing to the CAPM. Its appeal is that it is more general than the CAPM,
with less restrictive assumptions. However, like the CAPM, it has limitations, and like
the CAPM, it is not the final word in asset pricing.
Similar to the CAPM, or any other asset pricing model, APT posits a relationship
between expected return and risk. It does so, however, using different assumptions
and procedures. Very importantly, APT is not critically dependent on an underlying
market portfolio. In contrast, the CAPM predicts that only market risk influences
expected returns. Instead, APT recognizes that several types of systematic risk may
affect security returns.
The Law of One Price
APT is based on the law of one price, which states that two otherwise identical assets
cannot sell at different prices. APT assumes that asset returns are linearly related to
a set of indexes, where each index represents a factor that influences the return on
an asset. Market participants develop expectations about the sensitivities of assets to
the factors. They buy and sell securities so that, given the law of one price, securities
affected equally by the same factors will have equal expected returns. This buying
and selling is the arbitrage process, which determines the prices of securities.
APT states that equilibrium market prices will adjust to eliminate any pure arbi-
trage opportunities, which refer to situations where a zero investment portfolio can be
constructed that will yield a risk-free profit. According to the theory, if arbitrage
opportunities arise, a relatively few investors can act to restore equilibrium.
Assumptions of APT
Unlike the CAPM, APT does not assume:
1. A single-period investment horizon
2. The absence of taxes
3. Borrowing and lending at RF
4. Investors select portfolios on the basis of expected return and variance
APT, like the CAPM, does assume that:
1. Investors have homogeneous beliefs
2. Investors are risk-averse utility maximizers
Arbitrage Pricing Theory
(APT) An equilibrium
theory of expected returns
for securities involving few
assumptions about inves-
tor preferences
8 Richard Roll, “A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory’s Tests; Part I: On Past and Potential Testability of
the Theory,” Journal of Financial Economics, 4 (March 1977): 129–176.
246 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
3. Markets are perfect
4. Returns are generated by a factor model
Factor Models
A factor model is based on the view that there are underlying risk factors that affect
realized and expected security returns. These risk factors represent broad economic
forces and not company-specific characteristics and, by definition, they represent
the element of surprise in the risk factor—the difference between the actual value
for the factor and its expected value. Both the CAPM and the APT represent factor
models. The CAPM is a single-factor model, where the market portfolio is the one
factor. The APT is generally considered to be a multifactor model; however, the fac-
tors are not explicitly identified.
For any factor model, the factors must possess three characteristics9
:
1. Each risk factor must have a pervasive influence on stock returns. Firm-
specific events are not risk factors.
2. The risk factors must influence expected return, which means they must have
nonzero prices. This issue can be tested empirically by statistically analyzing
stock returns to see which factors pervasively affect returns.
3. At the beginning of each period, the risk factors must be unpredictable to the
market. This raises an important point. In Example 9.6, we use inflation and
the economy’s output as the two factors affecting portfolio returns. The rate
of inflation is generally not considered a risk factor because it is at least par-
tially predictable. In an economy with reasonable growth where the quarterly
rate of inflation has averaged 3 percent on an annual basis, we can reason-
ably assume that next quarter’s inflation rate is not going to be 10 percent or
negative. On the other hand, unexpected inflation—the difference between
actual inflation and expected inflation—may be a risk factor. By definition,
unexpected inflation cannot be predicted since it is unexpected.
What really matters are the deviations of the factors from their expected values.
For example, if expected inflation is 5 percent and actual inflation is only 4 percent,
this 1 percent deviation will affect the actual return for the period.
Factor Model Used to
depict the behavior of
security prices by identify-
ing major factors in the
economy that affect large
numbers of securities
An investor holds a portfolio of stocks that she thinks is
influenced by only two basic economic factors—inflation
and the economy’s output. Diversification once again plays a role, because the
portfolio’s sensitivity to all other factors can be eliminated by diversification.
Portfolio return varies directly with output and inversely with inflation. Each of
these factors has an expected value, and the portfolio has an expected return
when the factors are at their expected values. If either or both of the factors
deviate from expectations, the portfolio return will be affected. We must
measure the sensitivity of each stock in our investor’s portfolio to changes
in each of the two factors. Each stock will have its own sensitivity to each of
the factors. For example, stock #1 (a mortgage company) may be particularly
sensitive to inflation and have a sensitivity of 2.0, whereas stock #2 (a food
manufacturer) may have a sensitivity to inflation of only 1.0.
Arbitrage Pricing Theory 247
Understanding the APT Model
The APT model assumes that investors believe that asset returns are randomly gen-
erated according to a n-factor model, which, for security i, can be formally stated as
R E R f f f ei i i i in n i( ) 1 1 2 2  (9-5)
where
R ii the actual random return on security in any given p( ) eeriod
the expected return on security
the devia
t
E R i
f
i( )
ttion of a systematic factor from its expected value
s
F
i eensitivity of security to a factor
random error term,
i
ei unique to security i10
It is important to note that the fs in Equation 9-5 measure the deviation of each
factor from its expected value. Notice in Equation 9-5 that the actual return for a
security in a given period will be at the expected (required) return if the factors are
at expected levels [e.g., F1 − E(F1
) = 0, F2 − E(F2
) = 0, and so forth] and if the error
term is at zero.
A factor model makes no statement about equilibrium. If we transform Equa-
tion 9-5 into an equilibrium model, we are saying something about expected returns
across securities. APT is an equilibrium theory of expected returns that requires a
factor model such as Equation 9-5. The equation for expected return on a security
is given by Equation 9-6:
E R a b F b F b Fi i i in n( ) 0 1 1 2 2  (9-6)
E R i
a
i( ) the expected return on security
the expected ret0 uurn on a security with zero systematic risk
the risk preF mmium for a factor e.g. the risk premium for is equal( , F1 tto E F a( ) )1 0
With APT, risk is defined in terms of a stock’s sensitivity to basic economic factors,
while expected return is directly related to sensitivity. As always, expected return
increases with risk.
The expected return–risk relationship for the CAPM is
E R i i( ) RF market risk premium
The CAPM assumes that the only required measure of risk is the sensitivity to the
market. The risk premium for a stock depends on this sensitivity and the market
risk premium (the difference between the expected return on the market and RF).
The expected return–risk relationship for the APT can be described as
E R b
b
i i
i
( ) ( )
(
RF 1
2
1risk premium for factor
risk premium foor factor
risk premium for factor
2)
( )

b nin
10 It is assumed that all covariances between returns on securities are attributable to the effects of the fac-
tors; therefore, the error terms are uncorrelated.
248 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
Note that the sensitivity measures (βi and b i) have similar interpretations. They
are measures of the relative sensitivity of a security’s return to a particular risk pre-
mium. Also notice that we are dealing with risk premiums in both cases. Finally,
notice that the CAPM relationship is the same as would be provided by APT if
there were only one pervasive factor influencing returns. APT is more general
than CAPM.
Identifying the Factors
The problem with APT is that the factors are not specified, at least not ex ante. To
implement the APT model, we need to know the factors that account for the differ-
ences among security returns. The APT makes no statements about what the factors
are, their size or their sign. The factor model inputs must be identified empirically.
In contrast, with the CAPM the factor that matters is the market portfolio, a concept
that is well understood conceptually; however, as noted earlier, Roll has argued that
the market portfolio is unobservable.
Early empirical work by Roll and Ross 11 suggested that three to five factors influ-
ence security returns and are priced in the market.
According to APT-type models, different securities have different sensitivities to
the risk factors, and each investor has different risk attitudes. Investors can con-
struct a portfolio that has their desired risk exposure to each of the factors. Knowing
the market prices of the risk factors and the sensitivities of securities to changes in
the factors, the expected returns for various stocks can be estimated.
Research suggests that an APT model that incorporates unanticipated changes in
five macroeconomic variables is superior to the CAPM. These five variables, which
are typical of APT-type models, are12
:
1. Default risk
2. The term structure of interest rates
3. Inflation or deflation
4. The long-run expected growth rate of profits for the economy
5. Residual market risk
Using APT in Investment Decisions
Roll and Ross argue that APT offers an approach to strategic portfolio planning.
The idea is to recognize that a few systematic factors affect long-term average
returns. Investors should seek to identify the few factors affecting most assets in
order to appreciate their influence on portfolio returns. Based on this knowledge,
they should seek to structure their portfolios in such a way as to improve portfolio
design and performance.
Some researchers have identified and measured, for both economic sectors and
industries, the risk exposures associated with APT risk factors such as the five identi-
fied above. These “risk exposure profiles” vary widely. For example, the financial,
growth, and transportation sectors were found to be particularly sensitive to default
Other Prominent Factor Models 249
risk, while the utility sector was relatively insensitive to both unexpected inflation
and the unexpected change in the growth rate of profits.
An analysis of 82 different industry classifications showed the same result—
exposure to different types of risk varies widely. For example, some industries
were particularly sensitive to unexpected inflation risk, such as the mobile
home building industry, retailers, hotels and motels, toys, and eating places.
The industries least sensitive to this risk factor included foods, tire and rubber
goods, shoes, and breweries. Several industries showed no significant sensitiv-
ity to unexpected inflation risk, such as corn and soybean refiners and sugar
refiners.
A portfolio manager could design strategies that would expose them to one or
more types of these risk factors or “sterilize” a portfolio such that its exposure to the
unexpected change in the growth rate of profits matched that of the market as a
whole. Taking an active approach, a portfolio manager who believes that he or she
can forecast a factor realization can build a portfolio that emphasizes or deempha-
sizes that factor. In doing this, the manager would select stocks that have exposures
to the remaining risk factors that are exactly proportional to the market. If the
manager is accurate with the forecast—and remember that such a manager must
forecast the unexpected component of the risk factor—he or she can outperform
the market for that period.
Checking Your Understanding
6. Can the CAPM be considered simply a special case of APT?
Other Prominent Factor Models
Two other multifactor models have gained prominence within the academic com-
munity and are widely applied in investment management. These models are typi-
cally referenced by their generic but descriptive titles, which are the three-factor
model and the four-factor model.
Previously, we established that the CAPM and APT were developed based on
an underlying theory that linked returns to systematic risk factors. In contrast, the
three- and four-factor models were developed largely based on empirical obser-
vation. Specifically, numerous researchers, over several years, documented that
stock returns are systematically linked with firm market capitalization (size) and
firm relative value ratios (we discuss these findings in Chapter 12). Whereas the
CAPM and APT-based models focused on identifying the underlying risk factors
first and then investigated their relationship with returns, the three- and four-
factor models started with firm characteristics that were shown empirically to be
tied to stock returns. The three- and four-factor models are commonly classified
as characteristic- or microeconomic-based multifactor models due to the nature
of their factors.
Based on the empirical evidence, Fama and French developed the three-factor
model, which is as follows:
E R E Ri i M i iRF RF SMB HML1 2 3
250 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
where
E R i
RF
i( ) the expected return on asset
the return on the riisk-free asset
the sensitivity of asset to the marke1i i tt factor
the sensitivity of asset to the market capi2i i ttalization market cap factor
the sensitivity of asse
( )
3 i tt to the book-to market factor
small minus big the
i
SMB , rreturn on small cap stocks minus the return on large
cap sstocks
high minus low the return on high book-to-markHML , eet stocks minus the return
on low book-to-market stocks
The four-factor model was proposed by Carhart as an extension of the three-
factor model. The extension recognizes the empirical evidence showing that stock
returns tend to exhibit momentum (we discuss this evidence in Chapter 12). The
four-factor model is as follows:
E R E Ri i M i i iRF RF SMB HML UMD1 2 3 4
The first three factors are identical to the three-factor model. The final term rep-
resents the sensitivity to the momentum factor (β4i) multiplied by the momentum
factor premium (UMD). UMD stands for up minus down and equals the return
on stocks with the strongest past performance minus the return on stocks with the
weakest past performance.
Note that if one truncates the three- or four-factor models after the first fac-
tor, the resulting model is the CAPM. For this reason, it is common to reference
these two models as multifactor CAPM models. As noted above, the three- and four-
factor models were developed based on empirical evidence that linked stock returns
with firm characteristics. Subsequently, however, researchers have argued that the
included factors proxy for underlying risk variables.13
Some Conclusions about Asset Pricing
The question of how security prices and equilibrium returns are established—
whether via the CAPM or APT or some other model—remains open. Some research-
ers are convinced that the multifactor models are superior to the CAPM, while
others are not. The CAPM relies on observation of the market portfolio, which,
in actuality, cannot be observed. On the other hand, APT offers no clues as to the
identity of the factors that are priced in the factor structure.
In the final analysis, no model has been proven superior to the others. Each
model has its advantages and disadvantages. Additional testing is needed before we
can claim a clear-cut winner.
Summary 251
Summary
• Capital market theory (CMT), based on the concept of efficient diversifica-
tion, describes the pricing of capital assets in the marketplace.
• CMT is derived from several assumptions that appear unrealistic; however, the
important issue is the ability of the theory to predict. Relaxation of most of the
assumptions does not change the major implications of CMT.
• Given risk-free borrowing and lending, the new efficient frontier has a verti-
cal intercept of RF and is tangent to the old efficient frontier at point M, the
market portfolio. The new efficient set is no longer a curve, or arc, as in the
Markowitz analysis. It is now linear.
• All investors can achieve an optimal point on the new efficient frontier by
investing in portfolio M and either borrowing or lending at the risk-free
rate (RF).
• The new efficient frontier is called the capital market line (CML), and its
slope indicates the equilibrium price of risk in the market. In effect, it is the
expected return–risk trade-off for efficient portfolios.
• The CML must always be upward sloping.
• In theory, the market portfolio, M, should include all risky assets, although in
practice it is typically proxied by a stock market index such as the S&P 500.
• The separation theorem states that the investment decision (what portfolio of
risky assets to buy) can be separated from the financing decision (how much
of investable funds should be put in risky assets and how much in the risk-free
asset).
• Under the separation theorem, all investors should hold the same portfolio
of risky assets and achieve their own position on the risk–return trade-off
through borrowing and lending.
• Investors need to focus on that part of portfolio risk that cannot be eliminated
by diversification because this is the risk that should be priced in financial
markets.
• Total risk can be divided into systematic risk and nonsystematic risk. Nonsys-
tematic risk, also called diversifiable risk, can be eliminated by diversification.
• Market risk cannot be eliminated by diversification and is the relevant risk for
pricing financial assets.
• Based on the separation of risk into its systematic and nonsystematic compo-
nents, the security market line (SML) can be constructed for individual securi-
ties (and portfolios). What is important is each security’s contribution to the
total risk of the portfolio, as measured by beta.
• Using beta as the measure of risk, the SML depicts the trade-off between
required return and risk for all securities and all portfolios.
• The market model can be used to estimate the alpha and beta for a security by
regressing total returns for a security against total returns for a market index.
• The characteristic line is a graph of the regression involved in the market
model.
• Beta, the slope of the characteristic line, is a measure of systematic risk.
• Betas for individual stocks are unstable, while betas for large portfolios are
quite stable.
• If estimated returns for securities can be obtained from security analysis,
and plotted against the SML, undervalued and overvalued securities can be
identified.
252 Chapter 9 Capital Market Theory and Asset Pricing Models
• Tests of the CAPM are inconclusive. An ex ante model is being tested with ex
post data. It has not been proven empirically, nor is it likely to be, but its basic
implications seem to be supported.
• Alternative theories of asset pricing, such as the arbitrage pricing theory
(APT), also exist but are unproven.
• APT is not critically dependent on an underlying market portfolio. In con-
trast, CAPM predicts that only market risk influences expected returns. APT
recognizes that several types of systematic risk may affect security returns.
• A factor model recognizes risk factors affect security returns. These risk fac-
tors represent broad economic forces and not company-specific characteris-
tics and, by definition, they represent the element of surprise in the risk factor.
• APT is more general than the CAPM. If only one factor exists, the two models
can be shown to be identical.
• The problem with APT is that the factors are not specified, at least not ex ante.
• Most empirical work suggests that three to five factors influence security
returns and are priced.