557CHAPTER 21
As your study of investing tools and
techniques approaches the end, it
should be apparent that your invest-
ment management arsenal has
been greatly expanded. However,
the one major issue that still needs
to be addressed is developing an
investment plan that utilizes your
newfound investment knowledge.
Without an orderly, systematic
plan, the value of your accumulated
knowledge is likely to be greatly
diminished. With that in mind, it is
crucial that you devote some time to
developing a strategic plan for man-
aging your investment portfolio.
This chapter considers how
investors should go about planning
the management of their financial
assets. We consider why and how
financial planning should be thought of as an ongoing, systematic process. Hav-
ing a framework within which to make financial decisions in general and portfolio
decisions in particular allows investors to be more consistent in managing their
portfolios. We also analyze some personal financial planning issues, such as taxes,
protection against inflation, potential market returns, the life cycle of investors, and
other related issues.
A Perspective on Investing in Financial
Assets
The investment in assets is only part of the overall financial decision-making and
planning that most individuals must do. Before investing, each individual should
develop an overall financial plan. Such a plan should include decisions such as
whether to purchase a house. For most individuals, their house represents a sig-
nificant part of their portfolio. Furthermore, tax planning should be an integral
Managing Your Financial
Assets
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Organize the management of a
portfolio in a logical, systematic
manner.
• Describe the major personal finan-
cial planning issues that need to
be addressed.
• Explain the components of an
investment policy statement (IPS).
• Describe basic investment
management strategies and
explain the importance of
asset allocation for investment
performance
558 Chapter 21 Managing Your Financial Assets
part of any investment plan. Mistakes in tax planning can be very costly and inflict
considerable damage on portfolio value. In addition, decisions must be made about
insurance of various types—life, health, disability, and protection of business and
property. Finally, the plan should provide for emergency reserve funds.
Managing Your Financial Assets
The management of your assets should be viewed within an organized framework
regardless of your level of involvement in the management process. Portfolio theory
tells us that, the relationships among various investment alternatives must be con-
sidered to create an optimal portfolio and achieve your investment objectives.
Financial planning is an ongoing process. Good financial planning calls for an
organized, systematic framework. When we consider our financial assets, we can
examine detailed models for managing these assets. The portfolio management
process is described by Maginn, Tuttle, McLeavey, and Pinto in a book on managing
investment portfolios.1
CFA Institute awards the CFA designation and acts as the professional organi-
zation for the investment industry. It advocates the highest levels of professional
standards and ethical conduct and takes positions on issues of importance to the
capital markets.
The discussion in this chapter draws heavily from the CFA curriculum’s discus-
sion of the portfolio management process.
Investors should arrange the management of their portfolios such that they can
execute a thoughtful, organized plan on an ongoing basis rather than having to
react to events and being forced to make ad hoc decisions. Furthermore, if an indi-
vidual investor chooses to work with a financial planner or financial adviser, having
an organized plan provides a basis for a clear understanding between the two par-
ties. Conflicts often arise because the parameters involved, such as the client’s risk
tolerance and return expectations, have not been clearly spelled out and agreed to
by both parties.
As part of financial planning, you should view the management of your portfolio
within the following framework:
1. Decide what objectives you wish to accomplish and any constraints you face,
along with any particular preferences you have. For example, some investors
will not buy the “sin” stocks (alcohol, tobacco, gambling, etc.). Or an investor
could feel the need to have a certain amount of liquidity available.
2. Determine your expectations for the economy and its sectors. Try to assess
the outlook for the economy and for the financial markets. Study individual
stocks if you are going to be an active investor.
3. Develop a strategy and implement it. This involves asset allocation, portfolio
optimization, and selection of securities.
4. Keep up with what is going on with your portfolio on an ongoing basis and
be prepared to make changes. An economy moving into deflation has very
different implications for investors than the normal situation. Changes in the
tax laws can have a significant impact on investors.
Portfolio Management
Process The management
of a group of assets (i.e., a
portfolio) as a unit
1 See John L. Maginn, CFA, Donald L. Tuttle, CFA, Dennis W. McLeavey, CFA, and Jerald E. Pinto, CFA,
eds., Managing Investment Portfolios: A Dynamic Process, CFA Institute Investment Series ( John Wiley &
Sons, Publishers, 2007).
Managing Your Financial Assets 559
5. Rebalance the portfolio as necessary. For example, if you want at least 40 percent
in bonds and stocks become too large a percentage of the portfolio, rebalance.
6. Measure and evaluate the performance of your portfolio. As part of financial
planning, investors need to know how they are doing as investors.
Figure 21.1 illustrates this framework. Notice that it begins with the specification
of investor objectives, constraints, and preferences. This should help you to articu-
late what you hope to gain with your portfolio and how you plan to accomplish it.
Individual Investors Vary Widely
Significant differences exist among investors as to objectives, constraints, and pref-
erences. Individual investors may engage in direct investing, indirect investing, or
a combination of the two. Investors also use differing approaches to the valuation
of securities. Some believe in efficient markets, while others attempt to use the
principles of behavioral finance in their investing activities. Many investors apply
a life-cycle approach as they go from the beginning of their careers to retirement.
Furthermore, for all investors, taxes are an important consideration in portfolio
management.
Because each individual’s financial profile is different, individual investors must
incorporate their unique factors into their financial plan. Nevertheless, investors
should attempt to orient their financial planning toward an organized, logical frame-
work within which they will make and execute decisions. An investor’s financial plan
should be formally recorded in the investor’s investment policy statement (IPS).
Investment policy state-
ment (IPS) A document
that details an inves-
tor’s investment objec-
tives, preferences, and
constraints
Specification and
quantification of
investor objectives,
constraints, and
preferences
Portfolio policies
and strategies
Monitoring
investor-related
input factors
Portfolio
construction
and revision Attainment of
investor objectives
Performance
measurement
Asset allocation,
portfolio
optimization,
security selection,
implementation,
and execution
Monitoring
economic and
market input factors
Capital market
expectations
Relevant economic,
social, political,
sector, and security
considerations
FIGURE 21.1 The portfolio construction, monitoring, and revision process
Source: Figure 1.1 from “Chapter 1—The Portfolio Process and Its Dynamics” by John L. Marginn and Donald L. Tuttle
from Managing Investment Portfolios: A Dynamic Process, 2/e. Copyright © CFA Institute. Reproduced and Republished
with Permission from CFA Institute. All Rights Reserved.
560 Chapter 21 Managing Your Financial Assets
Checking Your Understanding
1. If proper financial planning calls for a framework as described previously, do
all investors need to structure themselves in a similar manner?
2. If individuals are to a large extent free to act as they choose, why do they need
to be explicit in stating their investment strategy?
Formulate an Appropriate Investment
Strategy
The first thing investors need to do in managing their portfolios is to carefully think
about what they are trying to achieve and determine if their investing goals are
reasonable. For example, attempting to earn an annual return of 15 percent from
a stock portfolio over a long period of time is not consistent with the known history
of stock returns.
Each investor should develop an IPS, which provides a foundation for subse-
quent investment decisions. The IPS details the investor’s investment objectives and
the constraints that the investor faces. If the investor uses a financial advisor, the IPS
serves as the contract between the investor and the advisor and can help to allevi-
ate problems with disagreements regarding the advisor’s actions. The IPS should
address each of the items detailed below.
• OBJECTIVES:
• Risk tolerance
• Return requirement
followed by,
• CONSTRAINTS AND PREFERENCES:
• Liquidity
• Time horizon
• Laws and regulations
• Taxes
• Unique preferences and circumstances
Investor Objectives
Risk and return are the basis of all investing decisions.
• Portfolio objectives center on risk and return because they are the two aspects
that most directly impact all investors.
Investors seek returns but must assume risk in order to have an opportunity
to earn the returns. A good starting point here is to think in terms of the risk–
return trade-off developed in Chapter 1 and emphasized throughout the text.
Risk and expected return are related by an upward-sloping trade-off, as shown in
Figure 21.2.
The risk–return trade-off can be supplemented with the life-cycle approach as
shown in the figure. Here we see four different phases in which individual investors
view their wealth, although it is important to note that the boundaries between the
stages are not necessarily clear-cut and can require years to complete. Furthermore,
Investor Objectives 561
an individual can be a composite of these stages at the same time. The four stages
are as follows:
1. Accumulation Phase. In the first stage of the life cycle, net worth is typically
small, but the time horizon is long. Investors can afford to assume a relatively
high level of risk.
2. Consolidation Phase. The mid-to-late career stage of the life cycle when
income exceeds expenses. During this phase, the investor works toward accu-
mulating a sizable investment portfolio. A balance in portfolio assets is sought
to provide a moderate trade-off between risk and return.
3. Spending Phase. Living expenses are covered from accumulated assets rather
than earned income. While some risk-taking is still preferable, the emphasis
is on safety, resulting in a relatively low position on the risk–return trade-off.
Preservation of capital becomes a priority for the investment portfolio.
4. Gifting Phase. Attitudes about the purpose of investments change to provid-
ing for the interests of others. The basic position on the risk–return trade-off
often remains about the same as in the spending phase. However, the risk
profile of the portfolio can vary significantly depending on the beneficiary’s
situation and the risk attitudes of the investor.
Assessing Your Risk Tolerance
Investors should establish a portfolio risk level that is suitable for them. There are
two major considerations that determine the suitable risk level for investors: their
willingness to take risk and their ability to take risk. Some investors have high will-
ingness to take risk, but their ability to take risk is limited. For example, ability may
be low due to the near-term nature of their financial needs and their needs being
large relative to portfolio size. In contrast, other investors could assume significant
risk because their portfolios are large and their financial needs are small relative to
their wealth; however, the investors may have low willingness. Perhaps the investors
are very sensitive to any significant loss in their overall level of wealth.
562 Chapter 21 Managing Your Financial Assets
Investment managers commonly assess an investor’s willingness to take risk via
a questionnaire that gauges the investor’s desire to avoid losses. Assessing an inves-
tor’s ability to take risk is done by analyzing the investor’s current portfolio value,
expected portfolio contributions, and projected financial needs.
Assume you have a significant equity allocation in an S&P 500-type portfolio. Ask
yourself what is the worst that is likely to happen to your equity position. Consider
the worst events that have occurred over the past 50 years. During the bear market
of 1973–1974, equity investors lost about 37 percent of their investment in S&P 500
stocks. During the bear market of 2000–2002, equity investors lost over 40 percent.
In 2008, the total return on the S&P 500 was −37 percent. Therefore, it is reasonable
to assume that with a long time horizon, investors will face at least one bear market
with approximately a 40 percent decline. This is consistent with the long-term stand-
ard deviation of S&P 500 returns of about 20 percent.
If an investor can accept a loss of approximately 40 percent once or twice in an
investing lifetime and is otherwise optimistic about the economy and about stocks,
the investor can assume the risk of U.S. stocks. Conversely, if such a potential decline
is unacceptable, an investor will need to construct a portfolio with a lower-risk pro-
file. For example, a portfolio of 50 percent stocks and 50 percent T-bills would cut
the risk roughly in half. Other portfolio alternatives consisting of stocks, bonds,
money market securities, and alternative assets would also decrease the risk.
• Perhaps the best way to think about investor objectives is to think about an
investor’s risk tolerance. Investors decide how much risk they are willing to
take and then attempt to maximize expected return given this level of risk.
Establishing Your Return Expectations
Investors should think in terms of expected returns, which involve probability dis-
tributions. The future is uncertain, and the best that investors can do is to make
probabilistic estimates of likely returns over some holding period, such as one year.
Because the future is uncertain, mistakes are inevitable, but this is simply the nature
of investing. Estimates of expected returns must be made regardless of the uncer-
tainties, using the best information and investment processes available.
An investor’s return objective consists of two components: returns required to
meet living expenses and returns desired to make discretionary expenditures, such
as a vacation condo. The investor, or investment manager, needs to place the high-
est priority on meeting living expenses during the investor’s retirement years.
Inflation considerations Inflation is a necessary concern for investors when think-
ing about the return requirements for a portfolio. The inflation rate of 13 percent
in 1979–1980 speaks for itself in terms of the significantly negative impact it had on
investors’ real wealth. Inflation is a persistent problem for investors because it eats away
at investment returns. Over the long run, inflation has averaged an annual rate of
3 percent over time. Even at this rate, the damage to investors’ real wealth is substantial.
At a 3 percent inflation rate, the purchasing power of
a dollar is cut in half in less than 25 years. Therefore,
someone retiring at age 60 who lives to approximately 85 and does not protect
himself or herself from inflation will suffer a drastic decline in purchasing
power over time. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, a basket of
goods that cost $100 in 1970 cost $665.90 in 2019.
EXAMPLE 21.1
What Issues Do Investors Face in Their Financial Planning? 563
Contrary to the beliefs of many, common stocks are not always an inflationary
hedge. In the 1970s, for example, inflation averaged an annual rate of about
7.5 percent, and the average stock returned slightly less than 6 percent. Nevertheless,
common stocks have been one of the best major asset classes to own in terms of
maintaining purchasing power over long periods. In contrast, inflationary periods
have been quite detrimental to bond market performance.
The very low inflation rates since the 1980s have lulled many investors into
thinking that inflation is no longer a serious problem. However, with the easy
money policies employed by many developed countries since 2008, it is reason-
able to expect that inflation will be higher in future years. Good financial plan-
ning requires investors to always be aware of inflationary possibilities and plan
accordingly.
Checking Your Understanding
3. Assume you believe that inflation will be higher in the future than it has been
in the past, averaging 3.5 percent on an annual basis. How can you determine
the impact of such an inflation rate on your purchasing power?
What Issues Do Investors Face in Their
Financial Planning?
With respect to their financial plans, investors vary widely in their preferences and
the constraints they face. Therefore, it is crucial that an investor’s IPS clearly detail
the investor’s unique circumstances. The most prominent issues that investors face
are analyzed below.
Liquidity Needs
Liquidity needs reflect funds necessary to meet required expenditures in the near
term, for example, within the year. Liquidity requirements are dependent on two
categories of near-term needs: those that are anticipated and those that are unantic-
ipated. For example, the expenditure for a two-week cruise is anticipated, whereas
funds needed due to the loss of employment are frequently not. Of course, it is
much easier to plan for anticipated liquidity needs as opposed to those that are
unanticipated.
Some Practical Advice
What, Me Worry about Inflation?
Investors need to think about the long run when
investing. The average rate of inflation has been
approximately 3 percent over the long run. To bet
against this long-run average in favor of recent
minimal inflation levels is foolhardy and will lead
to disappointments. After 30 years, assuming
an inflation rate of 3 percent a year, a dollar will
be worth only 41 cents. With 4 percent inflation,
it will be worth only 31 cents. Long-run portfolio
management without consideration for inflation
is a bad bet—actually, it is irresponsible.
564 Chapter 21 Managing Your Financial Assets
Good financial planning requires individuals to consider how they would raise
cash in the event that cash was urgently needed. As noted in Chapter 2, liquidity is
the ease with which an asset can be sold without eliciting a sharp drop in the asset’s
price. Obviously, cash equivalents (money market securities) have high liquidity
and are easily sold at close to face value. Many stocks also have great liquidity, but
their price reflects their current market valuations, which may be far lower than
anticipated.
Investors must decide how likely they are to sell some part of their portfolio in
the short run. As part of the asset allocation decision, they must decide how much
of their funds to keep in cash equivalents.
Important in financial planning is the establishment of an emergency fund that
will carry you if a crisis arises, such as loss of your job. Individuals are often advised
to hold a six-month emergency fund that can be immediately accessed without loss
of principal. Building such a fund can be easily incorporated into the overall man-
agement framework.
The financial crisis in 2008 gave a whole new emphasis and perspective on liquid-
ity considerations. Borrowing became much more difficult, and the cost of borrow-
ing was considerably higher. Investors wanted liquid positions, and safe positions, as
evidenced by the “flight to safety” to Treasury securities. Yields on these securities
were pushed to extremely low levels, and in the case of T-bills even negative yields
were observed for short periods.
Time Horizon
Investors need to think about the time period encompassed in their investment
plans. The objectives being pursued may require a strategy that speaks to specific
planning horizons. For most investors, their time horizon is long term and multi-
stage. Over time, investors transition from one stage to the next as lifetime events
are realized. Whereas many investors are focused on short-term performance,
often to their detriment, their IPS needs to inject financial discipline into their
financial plan. This will allow for smooth transitions as lifetime milestones are
achieved.
As we saw in Chapter 1, investing a sum of money each year for many years can
result in a very large ending wealth. This is due to the power of compounding. All
individuals, as part of their financial plan, should try to avail themselves of the ben-
efit afforded from compounding. It is indeed a powerful force.
Tax Considerations
Individuals must carefully consider the impact of taxes in their financial plans. The
treatment of ordinary income as opposed to capital gains is an important issue
because typically there is a differential tax rate. Estates face tax issues, dependent
upon the current regulations in effect. Even the cash surrender value of whole life
insurance can be taxable under certain circumstances.
Starting in 2018, dividends and long-term capital gains
are taxed at a maximum rate of 20 percent. In contrast,
the maximum federal rate applied to ordinary income is 37 percent.
EXAMPLE 21.2
What Issues Do Investors Face in Their Financial Planning? 565
The tax laws in the United States change frequently, making it difficult for inves-
tors to forecast the tax rates that will apply in the future. It appears that Americans
can count on more changes in the tax code in the future.
In addition to the differential tax rates applied, capital gains benefit from the fact
that the tax is not payable until the gain is realized. This tax deferral is, in effect, a
tax-free loan that remains invested for the benefit of the taxpayer. Some securities
become “locked up” due to the reluctance of investors to pay the capital gains taxes
that will result from selling the securities. For example, think about a stock bought
for $2 per share 40 years ago that today is worth $150 per share. Almost the entire
proceeds from the sale will be taxable—even with a favorable capital gains rate, the
tax bill will be sizable.
Retirement programs offer tax sheltering whereby any income and/or capital
gains taxes are avoided until such time as the funds are withdrawn. Investors must
grapple with the issue of which type of account should hold stocks as opposed to
bonds (given that bonds generate higher current income). Investors must also
decide whether to open standard tax-deferred accounts, with a tax savings for the
year of opening, or Roth accounts that provide tax-free income when withdrawals
are made.
In doing their financial planning, investors should be aware of the terminol-
ogy involved with taxes. Individuals often confuse marginal tax rates and average
tax rates, both of which are progressive. Your marginal tax rate is the highest tax
rate at which your income is taxed. Only part of your income is taxed at your
marginal rate. Your average tax rate, or effective tax rate, on the other hand,
is calculated by dividing the actual amount of taxes you pay by all income you
receive.
Regulations
Investors must obviously deal with the rulings and regulations of state and fed-
eral agencies. Individuals are subject to relatively few such requirements, while a
Marginal Tax Rate The
tax rate on the last dollar
of income
Average Tax Rate Total
tax liability divided by
taxable income
Some Practical Advice
One of the easiest and most effective ways to
add value to a portfolio is to be aware of tax dif-
ferences. Holding a security for more than
12 months, and thereby qualifying for a long-term
capital gain, allows a high-tax-bracket investor to
keep 80 percent of the gain since the tax rate is
20 percent. In contrast, the individual’s ordinary
income would be taxed at 37 percent. Therefore,
the individual would be giving up an addi-
tional 17 percent of the gain to taxes solely as a
result of the holding period. Making up such a
difference could be difficult to do.
An investor with a 10 percent return would have an
8.0 percent after-tax return with a long-term capital gain.
The same return taxed at the top federal marginal tax rate of 37 percent would
result in a 6.3 percent return.
566 Chapter 21 Managing Your Financial Assets
particular institutional portfolio, such as an endowment fund or a pension fund, is
subject to several legal and regulatory requirements.2,3
Investors must deal with a myriad of regulations when it comes to tax-deferred
accounts such as IRAs, Keoghs, SEPs, and so forth. There are strict rules on contri-
bution amounts, and the timing of these contributions, as well as on withdrawals.
Financial planning is very important in this area as mistakes—both omission and
commission—can be costly.
Unique Individual Circumstances
Investors often face a variety of unique circumstances. Therefore, there are many
paths that financial planning can take. The unique circumstances that an inves-
tor faces need to be recognized in the investor’s IPS so that they can be given
appropriate attention. For example, an individual may want to avoid investments
in firms that are associated with the manufacture of tobacco and alcohol. Or an
individual may have a large portion of her wealth invested in a single investment,
the family business. These issues need to be addressed in the investor’s IPS, so
that the investor and her financial advisor can make plans to accommodate the
unique factors.
Regardless of the various circumstances that individuals may face, having a care-
fully thought-out financial plan is important. Objectives need to be clearly specified
and contingencies planned for.
Investor Expectations as a Part of Financial
Planning
Rate of Return Assumptions
Investors base their actions on assumptions about the return expected from various
assets. Obviously, it is important for investors to plan their investing activities based
on realistic return assumptions.
As a starting point, investors should carefully study the historical returns reported
in sources such as Ibbotson Associates. These sources present historical mean
returns, both arithmetic and geometric, and the standard deviation of returns for
major asset classes such as stocks, bonds, and bills.
Having analyzed historical return data, there are several difficulties in forming
expectations about future returns. For example, how much should investors be
influenced by recent stock market returns, particularly when they are unusually
good or bad?
The years 2000–2002 brought substantial losses in the stock market but were fol-
lowed by five years of positive stock returns, one of which (2003) was over 28 percent.
The stock market experienced another dramatic decline in 2008 with the S&P 500
2 With regard to fiduciary responsibilities, a crucial concept is the Prudent Investor Rule. Basically, the
rule states that, in managing assets for another party, fiduciaries shall behave like persons of “prudence,
discretion, and intelligence” behave in governing their own affairs.
3 The Employee Retirement Income Security Act, referred to as ERISA, is administered by the Depart-
ment of Labor and regulates employer-sponsored retirement plans. It requires that plan assets be diversi-
fied and that the standards are applied to management of the portfolio as a whole.
Checking Your Understanding 567
falling nearly 37 percent. Furthermore, several prominent investment banks includ-
ing Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, and Bear Stearns either failed or were pushed
into mergers to avoid failure, and numerous large commercial banks also failed.
Therefore, we need to ask, How investor expectations about stock returns are influ-
enced by unusually good, and bad, recent returns? How are investors, particularly
relatively new investors, affected by this history as they form expectations about
future returns?
According to a BlackRock study, nearly half of millennials believe that investing
is too risk, and a Bankrate.com survey found only one in three millennials invests
in stocks. Their reluctance to invest is not surprising given that younger millen-
nials experienced the 2008 financial crisis, while older millennials also witnessed
the 2000–2002 bursting of the internet stock bubble. These traumatic events had
a chilling effect on the investing appetite of millennials. However, the prolonged
stock market resurgence since 2010 has been gradually persuading more of them to
participate in the market.
Investors should recognize some key points about future rates of return. In esti-
mating the expected return on stocks, we can combine the riskless rate and the
expected equity risk premium. A common approach for estimating the equity risk
premium is to use the arithmetic mean of historical equity risk premiums.
A second key point that investors should recognize is that common stock returns
involve considerable risk. The average annual return on common stocks for the
period 1926–2018 was 10.0 percent; however, that does not mean that investors
can realistically expect to achieve this historical return. To see this, consider the
extreme returns for the S&P 500 during this period. For example, the lowest annual
return reported by the S&P 500 was in 1931 at −43.3 percent, whereas the highest
return was 54.0 percent in 1933.
Checking Your Understanding
4. The geometric mean for the S&P 500 for the period 1926–2018 was 10.0
percent. How certain should investors be of earning 10.0 percent per year for
any holding period?
Remarkably, the cumulative return for the S&P 500 for the
five-year period starting in 1995 was nearly 250 percent.
Furthermore, in each of the five years, the return exceeded 20 percent and in
two years, it exceeded 30 percent. These values dwarf the long-term average
annual market return, which is about 10 percent.
Do investors form unrealistic expectations about future returns as a result
of such activity? Following the incredible market gains of the 1995–1999
period, the market dropped by over 37 percent on a cumulative basis over
the subsequent three years. Likewise, the market appreciated substantially in
the five-year period leading up to 2008, before the dramatic fall associated
with the financial crises. Finally, the market averaged a return of nearly 16
percent per year in the period from 2012 through 2017 without experiencing
a negative return; however, the return reported for 2018 was −4.6 percent.
Most observers believe that stock returns tend to “revert toward the mean”
over time—that is, periods of unusually high returns tend to be followed by
periods of lower returns, and the opposite is also true.
Implementing Investing Strategies 569
The asset allocation decision Important considerations in making the asset
allocation decision include the investor’s risk tolerance, return requirements
(current income vs. future income), and time horizon. These characteristics are
evaluated in conjunction with the investment manager’s expectations about the
capital markets.
How asset allocation decisions are made by investors remains a subject that is
not fully understood. It is known that actual allocation decisions often differ widely
from how investors say they will allocate assets.
According to some analyses, asset allocation is closely related to the age of an
investor—the so-called life-cycle theory of asset allocation. This makes intuitive
sense because the needs and financial positions of workers in their 50s differ on
average from those in their 20s. According to the life-cycle theory, for example, as
individuals approach retirement they become more risk averse.
Table 21.1 illustrates the asset allocation decision by presenting two exam-
ples to show how major life changes can affect asset allocation. One investor
is “conservative,” and one “aggressive.” They begin their investment programs
with different allocations and end with different allocations, but their responses
to major changes over the life cycle are similar. Both investors have a minimum
of 50 percent allocated to stocks at all stages of the life cycle because of the need
for growth.
Table 21.1 is illustrative only, and different investors will choose alternative allo-
cations. Lifestyle changes could cause investors to move from one stage to the other.
Moreover, even among similar age groups, goals can vary substantially. Overall, asset
allocation decisions may depend more upon goals than age. The important point is
that all investors must make the asset allocation decision, and this decision will have
a major impact on the investment results achieved.
It seems reasonable to assert that the level of risk tolerance affects the asset allo-
cation decision. Not surprisingly, substantial differences exist in relative risk aver-
sion across groups of individuals based on age and level of wealth. As we might
expect, income and wealth affect asset allocation to riskier asset classes in a posi-
tive manner.
How Major Changes Can Affect Your Asset Allocation
Conservative Aggressive
Asset Category
Early
Career (%)
Late
Career (%) Retirement (%)
Early
Career (%)
Late
Career (%) Retirement (%)
Cash 10 10 10 10 10 10
Bonds 20 30 40 0 10 10
Large-cap stocks 40 40 40 30 40 50
Small-cap stocks 15 10 5 30 20 15
International stocks 15 10 5 30 20 15
Source: Maria Crawford Scott. “How Major Changes in Your Life Can Affect Your Asset Allocation,” AAII Journal, October 1995, p. 17. Copyright © 1995 by the
American Association of Individual Investors. Reprinted by permission.
TABLE 21.1
Financial Planning on an Ongoing Basis 571
50 percent, and 10 percent for debt, equities, and cash equivalents, respectively.
If equities appreciate substantially with little movement in fixed-income securities,
the equity weight would rise above the target weight, which would require selling
equities and reallocating the funds to the other two asset classes.
The constant proportion strategy shifts funds across asset classes based on rela-
tive movements in asset values. The most commonly implemented variation of the
strategy is constant proportion portfolio insurance (CPPI). With CPPI, the inves-
tor sets a floor value for the portfolio. The difference between the floor value and
the portfolio value represents the investor’s cushion. As the cushion widens (nar-
rows), the strategy allocates a greater percentage of assets to higher (lower)-risk
asset classes. CPPI is a momentum-based strategy because it increases the allocation
to higher-risk assets after they have increased in value and decreases their allocation
after they have dropped.
Financial Planning on an Ongoing Basis
Individuals should monitor their circumstances on an ongoing basis. As they go
through the life cycle, objectives and constraints will assume differing degrees of
importance. For example, retirement is relatively unimportant to someone who is
starting their career, but it will become an item of significant interest. As for invest-
ing, it is an ongoing and dynamic process, and changes occur rapidly and frequently.
An investor’s circumstances can change for several reasons. These can be easily
organized in a systematic manner and include the following:
• Change in Wealth. Typically leads to accepting more risk in the case of an
increase in wealth, or becoming more risk averse in the case of a decline in
wealth.
• Change in Time Horizon. Generally investors become more conservative in
their investment strategy as their investment horizon approaches.
• Change in Liquidity Requirements. A need for more current income could
increase the emphasis on dividend-paying stocks, while a decrease in current
income requirements could lead to greater investment in midcap and small
stocks whose potential payoff may be years in the future.
• Change in Tax Circumstances. An investor who moves to a higher tax bracket
may find municipal bonds more attractive. Also, the optimal timing of the
realization of capital gains can fluctuate with tax changes.
• Change in Regulations. Laws affecting investors change regularly, whether tax
laws or laws governing retirement accounts, annuities, and so forth.
Tax-Advantaged Investing
As mentioned previously, a significant part of financial planning deals with taxes.
After all, for investors the important return consideration is what they get to keep
after taxes.
For taxable investors, the impact of taxes should play an important part in their
portfolio management strategy. Too often tax considerations are an afterthought or
are handled on an ad hoc basis. Taxes can easily have a larger impact than any other
costs associated with a portfolio of securities.
A simple approach to tax-advantaged investing is to choose a portfolio of growth
stocks that are held for a multiple-year period. These stocks generally pay minimal
572 Chapter 21 Managing Your Financial Assets
or no dividends, thereby avoiding the potentially sizable annual tax liability applied
to dividend income.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 is considered by many to be one of the most
market-friendly legislative actions in years. It sharply cut corporate income tax rates,
encourages repatriation of untaxed profits held overseas by U.S. firms, reduced
personal income tax rates, retained rates on long-term capital gains and dividends
at a 20 percent maximum, and allows firms to expense short-lived capital invest-
ment. Note that the favorable rates on dividends apply to qualified dividends, which
are what most corporations pay. Dividends from foreign stocks and REITs may not
qualify for the tax break. Of course, tax rates are subject to change since they are a
product of the political process.
We know from Chapter 2 that municipal bond income is not subject to federal
taxation. Tax-free money market accounts are also available. Investors holding
corporate bonds, particularly the high-yield variety, should typically do so in tax-
advantaged accounts; otherwise, the interest is taxed at full income tax rates.
Some mutual funds strive for tax efficiency. Of course, index funds by nature
are tax efficient because their only portfolio changes occur when the underlying
index changes. Some actively managed funds also seek to be tax efficient by keep-
ing turnover low and thus minimizing the capital gains that are realized. Others
try to match realized gains by selling positions with losses, thereby offsetting the
gains with losses.
Some tax-efficient mutual funds can be identified by their names, such as
Vanguard’s Tax-Managed Balanced fund, which invests in both stocks and bonds.
Others can be found by doing some research on sites such as Morningstar. For
example, Third Avenue Value is well known for having a low tax impact on
investors.
ETFs, typically being passively managed portfolios, tend to have extremely low
expenses. They also typically have little turnover, few or no capital gains distribu-
tions, and low dividend yields; therefore, they tend to be tax efficient.
Monitoring Market Conditions
Financial decisions are made in a dynamic marketplace where change occurs on a
continuing basis. Key macro variables, such as inflation and interest rates, should be
tracked on a regular basis. Whether individuals plan to buy a house, borrow money
for various purposes, invest in assets, and so forth, they need to be aware of develop-
ments in the financial marketplace.
A good example of how financial plans can go astray is to consider the Fed’s
actions between 2009 and 2015 to hold interest rates down. Those who planned to
steadily build up wealth through safe fixed-income investments such as money mar-
ket securities found themselves earning miniscule interest rates. Individuals had to
decide whether to accept these low rates in the name of safety or try to earn more
by taking more risk.
We now have enough market history to understand that financial crises are
inevitable in a capitalistic economy where market participants are more or less
free to act. Certainly the subprime meltdown and its aftershocks in 2008 pre-
sented a real challenge to the economy. Before that, we saw the Internet bubble
in the late 1990s, and before that, the savings and loan crisis in the 1980s. The
real question individuals face is not if there will be another financial or economic
crisis, but when.
Rebalancing a Portfolio of Financial Assets 573
Checking Your Understanding
5. Why do market observers view asset allocation as the most important decision
an investor makes? Explain your answer in the context of the 2008 financial
crisis.
Rebalancing a Portfolio of Financial Assets
Even the most carefully constructed financial plan is not intended to remain
unchanged. This is particularly true when it comes to one’s portfolio of financial
assets. It is important to monitor a portfolio and rebalance as necessary. The key is
to know when and how to do such rebalancing.
There are two basic approaches for determining when to rebalance a portfolio:
calendar rebalancing and percent-of-portfolio rebalancing. Calendar rebalancing
is done without regard to movements in asset values. Following this approach, the
portfolio is rebalanced according to a set schedule, for example, at the time of the
annual portfolio review. For the other basic approach, percent-of-portfolio rebal-
ancing, corridors are set for each asset class value and rebalancing occurs if an
asset class value strays outside the corridor. For example, the allocation to emerging
market equities would be reduced if its set corridor was 8–12 percent and emerging
markets appreciated such that its portfolio weight exceeded 12 percent.
The cost of rebalancing includes transactions costs, market impact costs, taxes,
and the time involved in making and executing the trade decision. The costs of
not rebalancing involve holding a suboptimal portfolio, in that the portfolio: is not
best suited for the investor, violates the investor’s asset allocation plan, is no longer
adequately diversified, and/or has undesirable risk exposure.
One of the problems involved in rebalancing is the “lockup” problem. This sit-
uation arises in taxable accounts subject to capital gains taxes. The tax liabilities
generated from rebalancing can be larger than the gains achieved by the active
management driving the turnover. In the absence of taxes, such as with tax-deferred
IRA and 401-k plans, investors would simply seek to hold those securities with the
highest risk-adjusted expected rates of return. With a lockup problem, however,
investors may be reluctant to rebalance the portfolio because of the capital gains
taxes that will result on the accrued appreciation which, until realized, remains
untaxed.
Rebalancing is difficult for many investors because it represents a contrarian
strategy. To rebalance, investors sell those asset classes that have appreciated and
reinvest the funds in those that have not. This is very difficult to do psychologi-
cally. During the stock market bubble in the late 1990s, it was almost impossible to
Some Practical Advice
How might investors spot a future problem in the
economy? One good tipoff is very large sums of
money flowing to one sector, such as subprime
and related mortgage securities, as happened
prior to the 2008 crisis. Likewise, huge sums of
money flowed into dotcom companies in the
late 1990s prior to the dotcom bubble bursting
in the early 2000s. Such imbalances have to be
corrected, sooner or later
do as the market continued to rise and rise. Ultimately, of course, the benefits of
rebalancing emerged as stocks plummeted and bonds appreciated.
Determining the Success of Your Financial
Planning
The financial planning process is designed to facilitate making investment deci-
sions in an organized, systematic manner. Clearly, it is important to evaluate the
effectiveness of the overall decision-making process. One very important part
of this is to measure portfolio performance. This allows investors to determine
the success of both their direct investments and their indirect investments in
mutual funds and ETFs. It is a key part of monitoring one’s overall financial
planning.
Performance measurement is important both to those who employ a professional
portfolio manager on their behalf and to those who manage their own portfolio. It
allows investors to evaluate the risks that are being taken, the reasons for the suc-
cess or failure of the investing program, and the costs of any restrictions that may
have been placed on the investment manager. This, in turn, could lead to revisions
in an individual’s financial plans. It is a critical part of the investment management
process and the logical capstone to the study of investments. We therefore consider
this issue next as a separate and concluding chapter of the text.
Summary
• Good financial planning should be thought of by investors as a process.
• A portfolio management process produces a set of strategy recommendations
for accomplishing a given end result.
• The entire process consists of developing explicit investment policies, consist-
ing of objectives, constraints, and preferences, determining and quantifying
capital market expectations, constructing the portfolio, monitoring portfolio
factors and responding to changes, rebalancing the portfolio when necessary,
and measuring and evaluating portfolio performance.
• As part of their financial planning, investors should develop an investment
policy statement (IPS) consisting of carefully stated objectives, constraints,
and preferences.
• The portfolio construction process can be thought of in terms of the asset
allocation decision and the security selection decision.
• Asset allocation is the most important investment decision made by investors.
• It is important to monitor market conditions, the relative asset mix, and the
investor’s circumstances. Investing is an ongoing and dynamic process, and
changes occur rapidly and frequently.
• Portfolio managers spend much of their time monitoring their portfolios and
doing portfolio rebalancing. The key is to know when and how to do such
rebalancing.
• The measurement of portfolio performance allows investors to determine the
success of their investing program.
• Today’s investors can take advantage of recommended asset allocations from
financial firms, life-cycle funds, tax-advantaged investing, and, very simply,
index funds and ETFs
