532CHAPTER 20
In the book Chronicles of a Million
Dollar Trader, the author offers a
detailed account of the process
used to grow his self-directed retire-
ment fund by $1 million. He ulti-
mately surpassed his objective by
earning $2 million in an 18-month
period through the use of equity
futures. Before you decide that
you too would like to use futures
to add a million dollars or more
to your portfolio value, you should
consider the case of Nick Leeson.
Leeson was the trader at Britain’s
Barings Bank who lost $1.3 billion
trading futures contracts on the
Nikkei stock index; the loss ulti-
mately resulted in Barings’s failure.
Leeson also wrote a book, titled Rogue Trader, detailing his experiences in trading
futures contracts.
Given the potentially spectacular gains and losses that are possible with futures
trading, you should perhaps learn something about futures contracts before decid-
ing whether to make futures part of your investment plan. This chapter covers
futures, which are derivative securities of importance to many investors. Although
our discussion pertains in general to all futures markets, our primary interest is
financial futures as opposed to commodity futures. As with options, futures allow
investors to manage investment risk and to speculate in the equity, fixed-income,
and currency markets.
An Overview of Futures Markets
Why Futures Markets?
Physical commodities and financial instruments typically are traded in cash markets.
A cash contract calls for immediate delivery and is used by those who need a com-
modity now (e.g., food processors). Cash contracts cannot be canceled unless both
parties agree. Current cash prices of commodities and financial instruments are
readily available at financial websites such as Yahoo! Finance.
Futures Contracts
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain why financial futures were
developed for use by investors.
• Describe the alternatives available
to investors in the futures markets
as well as how futures markets
operate.
• Analyze basic strategies involving
futures contracts.
• Explain the rationale for various
futures trading strategies and cal-
culate the profit from the strategies.
An Overview of Futures Markets 533
There are two types of cash markets: spot markets and forward markets. (1) Spot
markets are markets for immediate delivery.1 The spot price refers to the current
market price of an item available for immediate delivery. (2) Forward markets are
markets for deferred delivery. The forward price is the price of an item for deferred
delivery. The asset is delivered in the future at a price that is agreed upon today.
Forward contracts are centuries old, traceable to at least the ancient Romans and
Greeks. Organized futures markets in the United States, on the other hand, effec-
tively go back to the mid-19th century in Chicago. Futures markets are, in effect,
organized, and standardized forward markets.
• An organized futures exchange standardizes the nonstandard forward con-
tracts, establishing such features as contract size, delivery dates, and condition
of the items that can be delivered. Only the price and number of contracts are
left for futures traders to negotiate.
Individuals can trade without personal contact because of the centralized mar-
ketplace. Performance is guaranteed by a clearinghouse, relieving the gaining party
from worry that the losing party will fail to honor its commitment.
Suppose a manufacturer of class rings is gathering orders
to fill for this school year and wishes to ensure a price
for gold to be delivered six months from now, when the rings will actually
be manufactured. The spot (current) price of gold is not the manufacturer’s
primary concern because the gold will not be purchased until it is needed
for the manufacturing process. However, to reduce the risk involved with the
future price of gold, the manufacturer wishes to contract now for the needed
gold. Having a guaranteed price for gold will allow the manufacturer to price
its rings more accurately.
Our manufacturer could find a gold supplier (e.g., a gold mining firm) who
was willing to enter into a forward commitment or contract, which is simply a
commitment today to transact in the future. The supplier agrees to deliver the
gold six months from now at a price negotiated today. Both parties have agreed
to a deferred delivery at a sales price that is currently determined; however,
no funds are exchanged. Both parties have reduced their risk because the
supplier knows what it will receive for the gold when it is sold six months from
now and the ring manufacturer knows what it will pay for the gold when it
takes delivery six months from now.
EXAMPLE 20.1
Investments Intuition
Obviously, one of the parties will be disappointed
six months later when the price of gold has
changed, but that is the advantage of hindsight. If
investors could foresee the future, they would know
what to do to start with and would not have to
worry about risk. The forward and futures markets
were developed to allow individuals to deal with
the risks they face because the future is uncertain.
534 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
An important economic function performed by futures markets is price
discovery—that is, developing information about future cash market prices. The
price of a futures contract reflects current expectations about values at some future
date, which in effect is a forecast of the future price.
Some people or companies have a preexisting risk exposure that they want to
reduce. They do this by hedging their position. The futures markets serve a valuable
economic purpose by allowing hedgers to shift price risk to speculators. The risk of
price fluctuations is shifted from participants unwilling to assume such risk to those
who are. From a societal standpoint, hedging is the most important rationale for
futures markets.
• Price discovery and hedging are the primary functions of futures markets.
What Is Traded in the Futures Markets?
To most people, futures markets involve trading in commodities such as wheat,
gold, and oil. However, money can be thought of simply as another commodity,
and financial futures have become a particularly viable investment alternative for
numerous investors. Therefore, futures contracts currently traded on U.S. futures
exchanges can be divided into two broad categories:
1. Commodities: agricultural, metals, and energy related
2. Financials: foreign currencies and debt and equity instruments
Although financial futures are relatively new (compared to commodity futures),
they now account for about two-thirds of all futures traded in the United States.
Thus, the futures market to a large extent is a financial futures market.
Each category can be further subdivided as shown in Exhibit 20.1. As we can
see, the futures markets involve trading in a variety of both commodities and finan-
cials. Note that Exhibit 20.1 is a nonexhaustive list of items that trade on the futures
exchanges.
For each type of contract, such as corn or silver, different delivery dates are
available. Each contract specifies the trading unit involved and, where applicable,
the deliverable grade necessary to satisfy the contract. Investors can also purchase
options on futures contracts.
Concepts in Action
Yes, You Can Do Something About the
Weather
Futures contracts exist on a variety of commod-
ities and financial instruments. One of the most
interesting is the weather contract, traded on the
CME, which can be used to manage the risk asso-
ciated with unexpected weather events. Known
as weather derivatives, these futures allow one to
both hedge and speculate on the weather in 47
U.S. cities and several foreign countries. The under-
lying index can be based on temperatures, snow-
falls, frost, and hurricanes. These contracts have
many potential uses, particularly in agriculture.
Other examples include ski resorts that rely on
snowfall and coastal resorts that fear hurricanes
during the peak season for vacation renters
 Futures Contracts Traded in the United States,
by Category
The major futures contracts traded in the United States can be classified into the following categories (this is not an
all-inclusive list):
I. Commodities
Grains and oilseeds Wheat, corn, oats, soybeans, soybean oils, soybean meal, flaxseed, rye, canola, and rough rice
Livestock and meats Cattle (both live and feeders), pork bellies, and hogs
Foods Cocoa, coffee, orange juice, and sugar
Fibers Cotton
Industrial metals Copper, aluminum, nickel, zinc, and lead
Precious metals Gold, silver, platinum, and palladium
Oil Gasoline, heating oil, crude oil, gas oil, propane, and ethanol
Wood Lumber
II. Financials
Interest rates Treasury bills, Treasury notes, Treasury bonds, municipal bonds, 30-day federal funds, 10-year
swap, 5-year swap, Eurodollar, 1-month LIBOR, Sterling, Long Gilt, Euroswiss, German
Government Bond, Italian Government Bond, and Canadian Government Bond
Stock indexes S&P 500, S&P MidCap 400, NYSE Composite, Major Market, Russell 2000, CAC 40,
Nikkei 225, FTSE 100, and Toronto 35
Foreign exchange Euro, Japanese yen, Canadian dollar, British pound, Swiss franc, Australian dollar, Mexican
peso, Chinese yuan, and Russian ruble
The Structure of Futures Markets 535
The Structure of Futures Markets
U.S. Futures Exchanges
Futures contracts are traded on organized futures exchanges. While U.S. exchanges
were nonprofit associations for many years, exchanges now are often for-profit
corporations. Although multiple futures exchanges are in operation, most trading
occurs on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), the Chicago Board of Trade
(CBOT), and the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX). The CME is the most
active exchange. The CME and CBOT merged to form the CME Group, which later
acquired NYMEX. However, these exchanges continue to operate separately.
Unlike stocks, there are no specialists on futures exchanges. U.S. futures
exchanges have traditionally operated with a trading floor (a “pit”) where traders
and brokers come together in an auction-style, open-outcry market. This means
that they communicate with each other verbally and with hand signals. A futures
customer submits an order which goes to a floor broker on the trading floor to be
executed with other floor brokers representing other customers or with floor trad-
ers trading for their own accounts.
Electronic order matching has developed rapidly in the United States after a
slow start. The major futures exchanges in the United States use both methods
of trading—open-outcry trading and electronic trading. Firms offer customers
24-hour futures trading.
EXHIBIT 20.1 | Futures Contracts Traded in the United States,
by Category
The major futures contracts traded in the United States can be classified into the following categories (this is not an
all-inclusive list):
I. Commodities
Grains and oilseeds Wheat, corn, oats, soybeans, soybean oils, soybean meal, flaxseed, rye, canola, and rough rice
Livestock and meats Cattle (both live and feeders), pork bellies, and hogs
Foods Cocoa, coffee, orange juice, and sugar
Fibers Cotton
Industrial metals Copper, aluminum, nickel, zinc, and lead
Precious metals Gold, silver, platinum, and palladium
Oil Gasoline, heating oil, crude oil, gas oil, propane, and ethanol
Wood Lumber
II. Financials
Interest rates Treasury bills, Treasury notes, Treasury bonds, municipal bonds, 30-day federal funds, 10-year
swap, 5-year swap, Eurodollar, 1-month LIBOR, Sterling, Long Gilt, Euroswiss, German
Government Bond, Italian Government Bond, and Canadian Government Bond
Stock indexes S&P 500, S&P MidCap 400, NYSE Composite, Major Market, Russell 2000, CAC 40,
Nikkei 225, FTSE 100, and Toronto 35
Foreign exchange Euro, Japanese yen, Canadian dollar, British pound, Swiss franc, Australian dollar, Mexican
peso, Chinese yuan, and Russian ruble
536 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
The CME bills itself as the world’s largest and most diverse financial exchange. It
offers futures and options on futures on commodities as well as on finance-related
items—interest rates, stock indexes, and foreign exchange. The CME acts as an
international marketplace with its open-outcry platform and trading floor systems
linked to its Globex® electronic trading platform.
• Futures exchanges are firms that create markets and compete for the right to
trade contracts.2
Futures brokerage firms, known as futures commission merchants (FCMs), act
as agents for the general public, from which they receive commissions. Thus, a cus-
tomer can establish an account with an FCM, who, in turn, may work through a
floor broker at the exchange. FCMs can be full-service firms or discount firms, and
they can be stand-alone firms (doing business only in futures) or part of a financial
services firm offering securities and other services (e.g., a national or regional bro-
kerage firm).
Foreign Futures Markets
European futures exchanges are very competitive with most offering fully auto-
mated order-matching systems. Euronext was the first pan-European exchange.
It was created in 2000 by the merger of the Amsterdam, Brussels, and Paris mar-
kets. In 2002, it acquired the London International Financial Futures and Options
Exchange (LIFFE). In 2014, it was the leading European exchange.
Japan, which banned financial futures until 1985, has been very active in develop-
ing futures exchanges. Commodity futures markets account for most of the futures
trading in Japan. Japan has several commodity futures exchanges including the
Kansai Commodities Exchange and Tokyo Commodity Exchange.
The Clearinghouse
The clearinghouse is a corporation that is separate from, but associated with, an
exchange. All futures trades are cleared through the clearinghouse. Exchange
members must either be members of the clearinghouse or pay a member for this
service.
The clearinghouse for futures markets operates in the same way as the clearing-
house for options, which was discussed in some detail in Chapter 19. Effectively, buy-
ers and sellers settle with the clearinghouse, not each other. The clearinghouse is
2 For more in-depth descriptions, see Robert W. Kolb and James A. Overdahl, Futures, Options and Swaps,
5th ed. (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007), p. 54.
According to its website, CME Group is the world’s
leading derivatives marketplace, handling an average
daily volume of 19 million contracts. The company offers individuals and firms
the opportunity to manage risk, or profit by accepting risk.
The Mechanics of Trading 537
the seller to the buyer, and the buyer to the seller. It stands ready to fulfill a contract
if either buyer or seller defaults, thereby guaranteeing performance and helping to
facilitate an orderly market in futures.
The clearinghouse makes the futures market impersonal, which is the key to its suc-
cess because any buyer or seller can always close out a position and be assured of pay-
ment. The first failure of a clearing member in modern times occurred in the 1980s,
and the system worked perfectly in preventing any customer from losing money.3
• In essence, the clearinghouse is on the other side of every futures transaction
and ensures that all payments are made as specified.
Finally, the clearinghouse allows participants to easily reverse a position (take the
opposite position) before maturity because the clearinghouse keeps track of each
participant’s obligations. Thus, an investor who is short a gold contract can easily
cancel this position by buying (going long) the same gold contract.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Given the development of futures markets and the disadvantages of forward
contracts, what advantage does a forward contract offer?
2. Assume you buy several futures contracts that, at the expiration date, are
worth considerably more than when purchased so that you have a large gain.
How can you be assured that the losers on these same positions will make
good on their obligations?
The Mechanics of Trading
Futures Contracts
As noted earlier, a forward contract is an agreement between two parties that calls
for delivery of an asset (tangible or financial) at a specified future time at a price
agreed upon today. Each contract has a buyer and a seller. Forward markets have
grown primarily because of the growth in swaps, which in general are similar to
forward contracts. A swap is an agreement between parties to exchange streams of
cash flows over some future period.
• Forward contracts involve credit risk—either party can default on their
obligation.
Forward contracts also involve liquidity risk because of the difficulties involved in
getting out of the contract. Forward contracts, however, can be customized to the
specific needs of the parties involved.
A futures contract is a standardized, transferable agreement providing for the
deferred delivery of either a designated commodity within a specified geographi-
cal area or a financial instrument (or its cash value). Futures contracts are well-
specified commitments. Market participants know exactly what is involved in the
transaction, which in fact helps to promote liquidity in these markets.
Forward Contract A
commitment today to
transact in the future at
a price that is currently
determined, with no funds
having been exchanged
Swap An agreement
between parties to
exchange streams of cash
flows over some future
period
Futures Contract Agree-
ment providing for the
future exchange of a par-
ticular asset at a currently
determined market price
3 The clearinghouse deals only with clearing members, and not individual investors, making each clear-
ing member responsible for every position it carries on its books. Because the clearinghouse does not
deal with individual customers, it depends on the clearing member’s carrying and guaranteeing cus-
tomer accounts when it comes to margin requirements and payments.
538 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
• A futures contract locks in a price for delivery on a future date. The futures
price at which this exchange will occur at contract maturity is determined today.
The trading of futures contracts means only that commitments have been made
by buyers and sellers; therefore, “buying” and “selling” do not have the same mean-
ing in futures transactions as they do in stock and bond transactions. Although
these commitments are binding because futures contracts are legal contracts, a
buyer or seller can eliminate the commitment simply by taking an opposite position
in the same commodity or financial instrument for the same futures month. This is
referred to as offsetting the position.
Futures contracts are not securities and are not regulated by the Securities and
Exchange Commission. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC),
a federal regulatory agency, is responsible for regulating trading in all domestic
futures markets. In practice, the National Futures Association, a self-regulating
body, has assumed some of the duties previously performed by the CFTC. In addi-
tion, each futures exchange has a supervisory body to oversee its members.
Basic Procedures
Because a futures contract is a commitment to buy or sell at a specified future settle-
ment date, a contract is not really being sold or bought because no money is exchanged
at the time the contract is negotiated. Instead, the seller and the buyer simply agree to
make and take delivery, respectively, at some future time for a price agreed upon
today. As noted above, the terms buy and sell do not have the same meanings with
futures. It is more accurate to think in terms of:
• A short position (seller) commits the trader to deliver an item at contract
maturity at a price agreed upon today.
• A long position (buyer) commits the trader to purchase an item at contract
maturity at a price agreed upon today.
Selling short in futures trading means only that a contract not previously pur-
chased is sold. For every futures contract, someone sold it (thereby establishing a
short position) and someone else bought it (thereby establishing a long position).
• Like options, futures trading is a zero-sum game. The gains and losses on all
positions net to zero.
Whereas an options contract gives the buyer the right to make or take delivery,
a futures contract involves an obligation to take or make delivery. Delivery, or settle-
ment of the contract, occurs in months that are designated by the various exchanges
for each of the items traded. However, futures contracts can be settled by delivery or
by offsetting the position, with most being settled by offsetting.
• A futures contract involves an obligation—either the position is offset or deliv-
ery occurs.
Indeed, about 95 percent of futures contracts are closed by offset before the
contract expires. Holders close a position by arranging an offsetting transaction.
This means that buyers sell their positions and sellers buy their positions some-
time prior to delivery. When an investor offsets his or her position, it means that
their trading account is adjusted to reflect the final gains (or losses), and their
position is closed.
• Offsetting a position is the typical method of settling a contract.
The Mechanics of Trading 539
Thus, to eliminate a futures market position, the investor simply does the reverse
of what was done originally. As explained above, the clearinghouse makes this easy
to accomplish. It is critical to remember that if a futures contract is not offset, it
must be closed out by delivery.
Each exchange establishes price fluctuation limits on the various types of con-
tracts. Typically, a minimum price change is specified. In the case of corn, for exam-
ple, it is 0.25 cents per bushel, or $12.50 per contract. A daily price limit is in effect
for all futures contracts except stock-index futures. For corn, it is 20 cents per bushel
($1,000 per contract) above and below the previous day’s settlement price.
Long stock positions can literally be held forever. Even many short positions can
be held indefinitely as long as certain conditions are met. However, futures posi-
tions must be closed out within a specified time, either by offsetting the position or
by making or taking delivery.
Brokerage commissions on futures contracts are paid on the basis of a completed
contract (purchase and sale), rather than each purchase and sale, as in the case of
stocks. As with options, no certificates exist for futures contracts.
The open interest indicates contracts that have not been offset by opposite transac-
tions or delivery. That is, it measures the number of unliquidated contracts at any
point in time, on a cumulative basis.4 The open interest increases when an investor
goes long a contract and is reduced when the contract is liquidated.
Margin
Recall that with stock transactions the term margin refers to the down payment
required when money is borrowed from the broker to finance the purchase. Futures
margin, on the other hand, is not a down payment because ownership of the under-
lying item is not being transferred at the time of the transaction. 5 Futures margin
refers to the “good faith” (or earnest money) deposit made by both buyer and seller
to ensure the completion of the contract. These funds serve as a performance bond
to help ensure that traders fulfill their contract obligations.
Unlike stock trading, futures margin is required of all participants. All futures
market participants, whether buyers or sellers, must deposit minimum specified
amounts in their futures margin accounts.
Each clearinghouse sets its own minimum initial margin requirements (in dollars).
Furthermore, brokerage houses can require a higher margin and typically do so.
The margin required for futures contracts, which is small in relation to the value of
the contract itself, represents the equity of the transactor (either buyer or seller). It
is not unusual for the initial margin to be only a few thousand dollars while the value
of the contract is much larger. As a generalized approximation, the margin require-
ment for futures contracts is about 6 percent of the value of the contract. Since the
equity is small, the risk to the transactor is magnified.
In addition to the initial margin requirement, each contract requires a main-
tenance margin below which the transactor’s equity cannot drop without action
being taken. If the market price of a futures contract moves adversely to the owner’s
position, the equity declines. A margin call occurs when the price goes sufficiently
Futures Margin The
earnest money deposit
made by a transactor to
ensure the completion of
a contract
Initial Margin In dollar
terms, the initial equity an
investor has in a margin
transaction
Maintenance Margin The
amount of funds that must
be maintained at all times
as equity
Margin Call A demand
from the broker for an
additional cash deposit
when actual margin
declines below the mainte-
nance margin4 The open interest can be measured using either the open long positions or the open short positions,
but not both.
5 Because no credit is being extended, no interest expense is incurred as is the case when stocks are
purchased on margin. With futures, customers often receive interest on margin money deposited. A cus-
tomer with a large enough requirement (roughly, $15,000 and over) can use T-bills as part of the margin.
540 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
against the transactor such that the transactor’s equity value falls below the mainte-
nance margin. A margin call requires the deposit of additional cash (the variation
margin) to restore the account back to the initial margin level (not the mainte-
nance margin level).6
All futures contracts are marked to market daily, which means that all profits and
losses on a contract are credited and debited to each account every trading day. 7
Those contract holders with a profit can withdraw the gains, whereas those with
a loss will receive a margin call if the equity falls below the specified maintenance
margin. This process is referred to as daily resettlement, and the price used is the
contract’s settlement price.8
Marked to Market The
daily posting of all profits
and losses in an investor’s
account
Assume that the initial margin is equal to 5 percent of
the total value and an investor holds one contract. If the
price of the contract changes by 5 percent because the price of the underlying
commodity changes by 5 percent, this is equivalent to a 100 percent change
in the investor’s equity. This example shows why futures trading can be risky!
EXAMPLE 20.3
Table 20.1 illustrates how accounts are marked to market
daily. Consider an investor who buys a stock-index futures
contract on the DJJA using the CBOT® DJIASM futures contract.9 Assume the
brokerage firm requires an initial margin of $7,000 and a maintenance margin
of $5,000.
This contract has a multiplier of $10. Price quotes are in points ($10), and
the tick size is $10. The value of a CBOT DJIA futures contract is equal to
$10 times the current index level. For example, if the index is trading at
26,000, one contract is equivalent to investing $260,000 in the DJIA. The
seller of such a contract (the short position) is agreeing to sell $10 times the
index and the buyer (the long position) is agreeing to buy $10 times the index
on the contract’s expiration date. On the settlement day, the final settlement
price is $10 times the Special Opening Quotation of the index.
Assume that investor A buys a contract with the DJIA at 26,000 while investor
B, believing the DJIA will decline, sells (goes short) one contract at the same
time. After day one, the settlement price is 25,925. The buyer will have a debit
in his/her account of 75 × $10 = $750 because the price declined and the
buyer was long. Conversely, the seller’s account will have a credit of the same
amount because the seller was short and the price declined. At the end of day
1, the value of the buyer’s account is $7,000 − $750 = $6,250, while the value
of the seller’s account is $7,000 + $750 = $7,750. In effect, both accounts have
been marked to market.
Now assume that two weeks have passed, during which time each account
has been marked to market daily. The settlement price on this contract
has reached 26,400, with a move on the last day of this two-week period of
The Mechanics of Trading 541
150 points. The aggregate change in market value for each investor is the
difference between the current price and the initial price multiplied by $10,
the value of one point in price. This is:
26 400 26 000 400 10 4 000, , ,$ $
As shown in Table 20.1, this amount is currently credited to the buyer
because the price moved up as the buyer expected. Conversely, this same
amount is debited to the seller, who is now on the wrong side of the price
movement. Therefore, starting with an initial equity or margin of $7,000, after
two weeks the cumulative mark to market is $4,000. This results in a current
equity of $11,000 for the buyer and $3,000 for the seller. The buyer has a
withdrawable excess equity of $4,000 because of the favorable price movement,
whereas the seller now faces a margin call because the maintenance margin
for this contract is $5,000. In this example, the market increased sharply on
the last day of the two-week period, bringing the seller’s equity below the
required maintenance level. The seller would have to deposit funds to return
the account to the initial margin requirement level of $7,000.
Buyer (Long) Seller (Short)
Account after one day
Original equity (initial margin) $7,000 $7,000
Day I mark to market (750) 750
End of day 1 equity $6,250 $7,750
Account after two weeks
Original equity $7,000 $7,000
Cumulative mark to market 4,000 (4,000)
Current equity $11,000 $3,000
Withdrawable excess equity $4,000
Margin call $4,000
An Example of Investor Accounts, Using Stock-Index Futures,
Marked to Market
TABLE 20.1
Investments Intuition
Example 20.4 illustrates what is meant by the
expression that futures trading, like options
trading, is a zero-sum game. The aggregate
gains and losses net to zero. The aggregate
profits enjoyed by the winners must equal the
aggregate losses suffered by the losers. This also
means that the net exposure to changes in the
asset’s price must be zero.
542 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
Checking Your Understanding
3. The short position’s loss is equal to the long position’s gain. Explain.
4. The maturity date of a contract does not dictate realization of an investor’s
gains and losses. Explain.
Using Futures Contracts
Who uses futures, and for what purpose? Traditionally, participants in the futures
market have been classified as either hedgers or speculators. Because both groups
are important in understanding the role and functioning of futures markets, we will
consider each in turn. The distinctions between these two groups apply to financial
futures as well as to the more traditional commodity futures.
Hedgers
Hedgers are parties that face price risk from a commodity or an asset, which means
they are exposed to price changes. They buy or sell futures contracts in order to alle-
viate or eliminate the price risk they face due to their exposure to the commodity
or asset. In other words, hedgers actually deal in the commodity or financial instru-
ment specified in the futures contract.10
• By taking a position opposite to an existing exposure, hedgers plan to reduce
the risk of adverse price fluctuations—that is, to hedge the risk of unexpected
price changes. In effect, this is a form of insurance.
With futures trading, risk is reduced by having the gain (loss) in the futures
position offset the loss (gain) on the cash position. A hedger is willing to forego
some profit potential in exchange for having someone else assume part of the risk.
Figure 20.1 illustrates the hedging process as it affects the risk–return distribution.
Notice that the unhedged position has a greater chance of a larger loss but also a
greater chance of a larger gain.
• The hedged position has a smaller chance of a low return but also a smaller
chance of a high return. Thus, hedging reduces the variance in the outcome.
Hedged position
Unhedged position
Probability density
FIGURE 20.1 Return distribution for hedged and unhedged positions
10 The exposure may currently exist (a cash hedge) or may be expected to exist in the future (an anticipa-
tory hedge).
Using Futures Contracts 543
How to Hedge with Futures
The nature of a cash market position determines the appropriate hedge in the
futures market. A commodity or financial instrument held (in inventory) represents
a long position because these items could be sold in the cash market. In contrast, a
transactor who sells a futures contract has created a short position.
• The key to any hedge is that a futures position is taken opposite to the position
in the cash market.
Because transactors can assume two basic positions with futures contracts, long
and short, there are two basic hedge positions: the short (sell) hedge and the long
(buy) hedge.
1. The short (sell) hedge. A cash market inventory holder must sell (short) the
futures. For example, investors should think of short hedges as a means of
protecting the value of their portfolios. Since they are holding securities,
they are long on the cash position and need to protect themselves against
a decline in prices. A short hedge reduces the risk taken in a cash market
(long) position.
2. The long (buy) hedge. An individual who plans to own an asset in the future
but currently holds no cash inventory (holds no commodities or financial
instruments) is short in the cash market; therefore, to hedge with futures
requires a long position. The individual wants to lock in the current price
until cash is available to make the investment. The use of a long hedge reduces
the risk of the individual’s short position.
Hedging is not an automatic process. It requires more than simply taking a
position. Hedgers must make timing decisions as to when to initiate and end the
process. As conditions change, hedgers must adjust their hedge strategy.
One aspect of hedging that must be considered for hedging to be successful is
“basis” risk. The basis for financial futures often is defined as the difference between
the cash price and the futures price of the item being hedged11
:
Basis cash price futures price(spot)
The basis must be zero on the maturity date of the contract. That is, the
futures price and the cash price must be equal, resulting in a zero basis; however,
transactions costs can cause minor discrepancies. In the interim, the basis fluc-
tuates in an unpredictable manner and is not constant during a hedge period.
Basis risk, therefore, is the risk hedgers face as a result of unexpected changes
in basis.
Short Hedge A transac-
tion involving the sale of
futures (a short position)
while holding the asset (a
long position)
Long Hedge A transac-
tion where the asset is
currently not held, but
futures are purchased to
lock in current prices
Basis The difference
between the futures price
and the spot price of an
item
Investments Intuition
Hedging techniques exhibit the trade-off that
underlies all investing decisions: Hedging
reduces the risk of loss but also reduces the
potential return. Thus, hedging is used by people
who are uncertain of future price movements
and are willing to protect themselves against
adverse price movements at the expense of
possible gains. There is no free lunch!
544 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
In hedging, the buyer benefits from a weakening basis (cash price weakens relative
to futures). The seller benefits from a strengthening basis (cash price strengthens
relative to futures). It is important to note that the basis can strengthen or weaken
when price levels are falling or rising.
Although changes in the basis affect the hedge position during its life, a hedge
will reduce risk as long as the variability in the basis is less than the variability in the
price of the asset being hedged. The significance of basis risk to investors is that risk
cannot be entirely eliminated. Hedging a cash position will involve basis risk.
Speculators
In contrast to hedgers, speculators buy or sell futures contracts in an attempt to
earn a return. Unlike hedgers, speculators typically do not transact in the physical
commodity or financial instrument underlying the futures contract. In other words,
they have no prior market position. Some speculators are professionals who trade
for a living; others are amateurs, ranging from the very sophisticated to the novice.12
• Speculators assume the risk of price fluctuations, hoping to profit from them.
Speculators are essential to the proper functioning of the futures market, absorb-
ing the excess demand or supply generated by hedgers and assuming the risk of
price fluctuations that hedgers wish to avoid. Speculators contribute to the liquidity
of the market and reduce the variability in prices over time.
Why speculate in futures markets? After all, one could speculate in the underly-
ing instruments. For example, an investor who believed interest rates were going
to decline could buy T-bonds directly and avoid the T-bond futures market. The
potential advantages of speculating in futures markets include:
1. Leverage. The magnification of gains (and losses) can easily be 10 to 1.
2. Ease of transacting. An investor who predicts an interest rate increase will
have difficulty selling bonds short, but taking a short position in a T-bond
futures contract is easy.
3. Transaction costs are often significantly smaller in futures markets, relative to
cash markets.
By all accounts, an investor’s likelihood of success when speculating in futures is
not very good. The small investor is up against stiff odds when it comes to speculating
with futures contracts. Thus, for most individuals, futures should be used for hedg-
ing purposes.
Calculating Rate of Return on Futures Contracts
The return for most financial assets includes both an income component and a capi-
tal gain (loss) component. In contrast, with futures contracts, there is no income
component, only a price change or capital gain (loss). Furthermore, the investor does
not put up the full contract value, but only the margin required, which is typically very
small. What matters when we calculate a return is to relate the cash flows received to
the actual cash investment made by the investor. The return on investment is stated as:
Selling price of contract s purchase price of contract s
MMargin deposit made by investor (20-1)
12 Floor traders often take very short-term (minutes) positions to exploit any short-lived market anomalies.
Financial Futures 545
Checking Your Understanding
5. What is the difference between a hedger and a speculator when it comes to
owning the underlying asset involved in a futures contract?
Financial Futures
Financial futures are futures contracts on equity indexes, fixed-income securities,
and currencies. They give investors greater opportunity to fine-tune the risk–return
characteristics of their portfolios. In recent years, this flexibility has become increas-
ingly important as stock prices have become more volatile and as investors have
sought new techniques to reduce the risk of equity positions.
• There are three broad types of financial futures: currency futures, interest rate
futures, and equity futures.
The procedures for trading financial futures are comparable to those for a com-
modity. At maturity, stock-index futures settle in cash because it would be impractical
to deliver all the stocks in a particular index.13 Unlike traditional futures contracts,
stock-index futures typically have no daily price limits.
We analyze each of the three broad types of financial futures. Hedging and spec-
ulative activities within each category are discussed separately.
Foreign Currency Futures
Foreign currency trading has existed for many years and has become increasingly
important in the global economy. Foreign currencies are traded in both a forward
market and a futures market, with the forward market the larger of the two.
Every exchange rate (price) is a relative price because every pair of foreign
exchange rates are related to each other as reciprocals. For example, a euro rate of
Financial Futures Futures
contracts on financial
assets
Assume in December a speculator buys two May wheat
contracts at 624’0 ($6.24 per bushel). The margin
requirement for each is $1,700, and the contract size is 5,000 bushels.
Sometime later the contract is quoted at 645’0 ($6.45 per bushel). The gain
is $0.21 × 5000 × 2 = $2,100. The return on the speculator’s actual cash outlay
(the total margin requirement) is
$ $ /$64 500 62 400 3 400 61 8, , , . %
This high return was achieved because the price of wheat rose, and futures
contracts have a lot of leverage. Note that the total margin requirement of
$3,400 is only 5.4 percent of the original value of the two wheat contracts.
Of course, there is always a downside. Had wheat prices declined, the entire
margin could have been lost.
546 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
$1.0852 indicates that one euro will buy $1.0852 of U.S. currency. Conversely, one
U.S. dollar will buy (1/1.0852 = 0.9215) euros.14
Traders need information about individual contracts, including: prices, size of
contract, expiration dates, maximum daily movements, and so forth. This informa-
tion can be found at the various exchanges where the contracts are traded, such as
www.cmegroup.com.
Hedging with foreign currency futures Companies often use currency futures
when they are exposed to foreign currency exchange risk. Investors can use currency
futures to protect their currency positions in foreign securities, thereby earning
what the foreign securities offer without being adversely affected by exchange rate
movements.
Speculating with foreign currency futures Investors can speculate on the
differences in exchange rates between two countries, based on their beliefs
about what is going to happen. For example, due to the Fed’s easy money policy
and weak economic conditions in the United States, the dollar fell relative
to most currencies during 2013. Subsequently, however, the dollar rallied rela-
tive to most currencies due to the U.S. economic recovery and the Fed’s decision
to move away from its easy money policy. A speculative strategy depends upon
accepting price risk in order to profit from the projected move in currency
prices.
Let’s consider the euro/dollar (EUR/USD) futures.
Assume a U.S. investor buys $270,000 of French notes
in January because of their relatively high yields and plans to sell them in
December. We abstract from margin requirements and assume the yield curve
remains flat. The investor wants to collect the higher yield without taking
much exchange rate risk.
The contract size is €125,000, with expirations in March, June, September,
and December. At a price of $1.0852, one contract is worth $1.0852 × 125,000
or $135,650. To protect against adverse currency movements, the investor sells
two futures contracts with a total value of $135,650 × 2 = $271,300. Now assume
the dollar rises against the euro so that one dollar in December buys 0.9542
euros instead of the previous 0.9215 (calculated as 1/1.0852). The euro
contract is now quoted at (1/0.9542 = $1.048), and each contract is worth
125,000 × $1.048 = $131,000, or a total of $262,000.
The investor makes a profit on the two futures contracts of ($271,300 −
$262,000 = $9,300) because she sold the contracts and the euro declined.
However, when she sells the notes and buys dollars back, she loses on the
transaction. The original $270,000 was worth, in euros, $270,000 × 0.9215 =
248,805. Now the 248,805 is worth only 248,805 × $1.048 = $260,748. Therefore,
the investor has a loss on the investment of $9,252 and a gain on the futures
of $9,300. The investor is able to collect the high yields that the French notes
were offering and hedge the price risk associated with a change in the currency
exchange rate. Without the hedge, her return would have been significantly
different.
EXAMPLE 20.6
14 The daily exchange rates can be found at several places including wsj.com, “Markets,” and “Currencies.”
Financial Futures 547
It is important to remember that futures contracts can have large payoffs but also
staggering losses. Because of the small amount of margin required, if an investor’s
position works out well, the percentage gains can be very large. Conversely, the
leverage can also magnify investor losses.
Interest Rate Futures
Bond prices are very sensitive to interest rate movements. Interest rate futures allow
bondholders and others who are affected by volatile interest rates to transfer this
risk. A primary reason for the growth in financial futures is that portfolio managers
and investors are increasingly protecting themselves against adverse movements in
interest rates. Protecting the value of a fixed-income portfolio requires investors to
consider the possible impact of interest rate changes.
There are numerous alternative interest rate futures contracts available on the
various exchanges. 15 The CME trades contracts on T-bills, agency notes, Eurodollars,
and the one-month LIBOR rate, among others. The CBOT specializes in longer-
maturity instruments, including T-notes (2-, 5-, and 10-year maturities) and T-bonds.
The CBOT also trades contracts on 30-day federal funds.
Exhibit 20.2 shows selected characteristics for a few of the more popular futures
contracts on fixed-income securities. Contracts are available on various maturities
of U.S. T-notes in trading units of $100,000 and $200,000, on T-bonds in units of
$100,000, and on T-bills in units of $1 million.
Reading quotes The face value of a 10-year T-note at maturity is $100,000, and
price quotations are percentages of par, with 32nds, and fractions of 32nds. Since
one point is $1,000, 1/32 is worth $31.25. A quote of 126-16 represents a price of
126 and 16/32nds percent of par, or $126,500.
Hedging with interest rate futures We now consider an example using inter-
est rate futures to hedge an investment position. Obviously, other examples could
be constructed involving various transactors, such as a financial institution; various
financial instruments, such as a portfolio of T-bills; and various scenarios under
which the particular hedger is operating.
EXHIBIT 20.2 | Characteristics of Interest Rate Futures Contracts
Contract Size or Trading Unit Minimum Fluctuations
Treasury bonds $100,000 par value 8% coupona 1/32 or $31.25
10-year Treasury notes $100,000 par value ½ of 1/32 or $15.625
30-day fed funds $5,000,000 ¼ of one basis point (0.0025) or $10.4175
2-year Treasury notes $200,000 par value ¼ of 1/32 or $15.625
a Bonds with other coupons are usable with price adjustments.
15 The Chicago Board of Trade launched financial futures trading in 1975 by opening trading in
Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA or Ginnie Mae) bonds. T-bond futures appeared
Short hedge Suppose an investor holds a bond portfolio consisting of $1 million
in two-year T-notes. The investor plans to sell the notes in the near future to pay an
obligation. The investor fears that an interest rate increase would leave her short in
terms of paying the obligation.
The investor could take a short position in two-year T-note futures. If done prop-
erly, the short position in the futures will gain as much as the T-notes lose in the
event of an interest rate increase. What if yields drop? In this case, the investor will
lose on the futures position but gain on the T-note value. Therefore, the investor
will able to meet the upcoming obligation regardless of what interest rates do.
The mechanics of executing a short hedge (also called an inventory hedge)
require the hedger to determine the hedge ratio, or the number of contracts to be
sold. This is a function of the asset’s value and the value of each futures contract.
Long hedge An alternative hedge is the anticipatory hedge, a long hedge, whereby
an investor purchases a futures contract on a security the investor plans to acquire
in the future. At some designated time in the future, the investor will purchase the
security and sell the futures contract. This results in a net price paid equal to the
security price minus the gain or loss on the futures position.
Consider an investor planning to purchase a bond at today’s price but complet-
ing the transaction in three months. If rates drop, the bond will cost more at that
point in time. By purchasing a futures contract now, as a hedge, the investor can
lock in the interest rate implied by the interest rate futures contract. At the transac-
tion’s conclusion, the investor will pay a net price that reflects the ending bond price
minus the gain (loss) on the futures contract. In effect, if rates decline, the gain on
the futures will help offset any loss on the bond.
Speculating with interest rate futures Investors can speculate with interest rate
futures as well as hedge with them. To do so, investors make assessments of likely
Concepts in Action
Using Futures to Manage Your Bond
Portfolio
Suppose you are concerned about the possibility
of rising interest rates, and you own a substan-
tial bond portfolio with an average duration
of 6.5 years. You know that if interest rates rise,
bond prices will fall, and you know the portfolio’s
duration offers an approximate guide to the
percentage decrease that will occur. You decide
to shorten the duration of your portfolio—let’s
say to five years. If interest rates rise, the prices
of your bonds will still decline, but with a shorter
duration, they will decline less than with your
original position. An obvious way to shorten your
portfolio’s duration is to sell longer-maturity bonds
and replace them with shorter-maturity bonds.
However, this involves transaction costs and has
possible tax implications.
An alternative is to use futures to sell duration.
This strategy has lower transaction costs and
can be reversed quickly and easily. You can use
Treasury futures to lower the duration of your
bond portfolio.
A simple way to sell duration is to sell 1.5 years
of duration by going short 10-year T-note futures.
You would need to determine how many con-
tracts to sell. If you were to hedge completely,
the duration would be zero. Instead, you wish
to achieve a 23 percent hedge, reducing your
duration from 6.5 years to 5 years (1.5/6.5 = 23
percent). The details of such a transaction can
be determined with a little effort.
Although there are some complications in this
transaction, such as whether the shape of the yield
curve shifts, futures contracts can be used in inno-
vative ways when it comes to managing a portfolio
Financial Futures 549
movements in interest rates and assume a futures position that corresponds with
this assessment. If an interest rate increase is anticipated, the investor will sell inter-
est rate futures, because a rate increase drives down bond prices and, therefore, the
price of the futures contract. The investor sells the contract with the expectation of
buying it back later at a lower price. Of course, a decline in interest rates will result
in a loss for the investor, since the price will rise.
The usefulness of interest rate futures for pursuing such strategies is significant.
A speculator who wishes to assume a short position in bonds cannot do so readily in
the cash market (either financially or mechanically). Interest rate futures provide
the means to short bonds easily.
In a similar manner, investors can speculate on a decline in interest rates by
purchasing interest rate futures. If the rate decline materializes, bond prices and
the value of the futures contract will rise. Because of the leverage involved, the gain
can be large; however, the loss can also be large if the rate increases.
Stock-Index Futures
Stock-index futures trading was initiated in 1982. Investors can trade futures con-
tracts on major market indexes such as the DJIA and the S&P 500. Contracts are also
available on numerous other indexes such as a “mini” S&P Index, the Nasdaq 100,
the Russell 2000, and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average (Japanese market).
The S&P 500 contract is the most popular stock-index futures contract, account-
ing for the bulk of trading in stock-index futures. The value of an S&P 500 contract
is determined by using a multiplier of $250. The minimum tick is 0.10, or $25.
Delivery is not permitted in stock-index futures because of its impracticality.
Instead, each open contract is settled in cash on the settlement day by taking an
offsetting position using the price of the underlying index.16
Stock-index futures offer investors the opportunity to act on their investment
opinions concerning the future direction of the market. They need not select indi-
vidual stocks, and it is easy to short the market. Furthermore, investors who are
concerned about unfavorable short-term market prospects, but remain bullish for
the longer run, can protect their equity portfolio value in the interim by selling
stock-index futures.
Hedging with stock-index futures Common stock investors hedge with financial
futures for the same reasons that fixed-income investors use them. Equity investors
are subject to the risk of overall market moves, that is, systematic risk. A futures con-
tract enables the investor to transfer part of this risk to those willing to assume it.
Stock-index futures have opened up new, and relatively inexpensive, opportunities
for investors to manage market risk through hedging.
Assume that in November a speculator thinks interest
rates will rise over the next two weeks and wishes to profit
from this expectation. The investor can sell one December T-bond futures
contract at a price of 90–20. Two weeks later, the price of this contract has
declined to 88–24 because of rising interest rates. This investor would gain
1 and 28/32, or $1,875 (each 1/32 is worth $31.25), and could close out the
position by buying an identical contract.
EXAMPLE 20.7
16 The final settlement price is set equal to the closing index on the maturity date
Chapter 8 identifies two types of stock risk: systematic risk and unsystematic risk.
Diversification eliminates most of the unsystematic risk in a portfolio, but not the
systematic risk. Although an investor could trade individual stocks to adjust the port-
folio’s beta in anticipation of a market rise or fall, this can be a costly proposition.
Investors can use financial futures on stock market indexes to hedge against an
overall market decline. That is, investors can hedge against systematic or market risk
by selling the appropriate number of contracts against a stock portfolio. In effect,
stock-index futures give investors the opportunity to protect their portfolios against
market fluctuations.
To hedge market risk, investors take a position in the hedging asset (in this case,
stock-index futures) such that profits or losses on the hedging asset offset changes
in the stock portfolio’s value. Stock-index futures accomplish this because changes
in the futures prices are highly correlated with changes in stock portfolio values that
are caused by market-wide events. The more diversified the portfolio, and therefore
the lower its unsystematic risk, the greater the correlation between the futures con-
tract and the stock portfolio.
A comparison of the S&P 500 futures price to the value of a portfolio that is
essentially completely diversified (i.e., the portfolio has only market risk) shows that
the two track each other very closely. This indicates that stock-index futures can be
very effective in hedging a portfolio’s market risk.
Short hedges Since so much common stock is held by investors, the short hedge
is the natural position for most investors. Investors who hold stock portfolios hedge
market risk by selling stock-index futures, which means they assume a short position.
A short hedge is implemented by selling a futures contract with the goal of offset-
ting losses on the stock portfolio with gains on the futures position. If the market
falls, leading to a loss on the cash position (the stock portfolio), stock-index futures
prices will also fall, leading to a profit for sellers of futures.
The potential reduction in price volatility by hedging is shown in Figure 20.2,
which compares the performance of a well-diversified portfolio (the unhedged
portfolio) with the same portfolio hedged by sales of S&P 500 futures. To test the
power of the hedge, we focus on 1987 when the market suffered its greatest one-day
decline in history, October 19, 1987 (Black Monday).
1300
1100
900
700
500
300 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987
Index (1962 = 100)
Unhedged portfoliio
Hedged portfoliio
FIGURE 20.2 The value of a well-diversified portfolio versus the value of the same portfolio hedged by
sales of S&P 500 index futures
Source: Charles S. Morris, “Managing Stock Market Risk with Stock Index Futures,” Economic Review (June 1989): 10.
Financial Futures 551
Clearly, there is much less variability in the value of the hedged portfolio as com-
pared to the value of the unhedged portfolio. In fact, the volatility of the returns is
91 percent lower. Notice in particular what happened in the great market crash of
October 1987. The value of the unhedged portfolio fell some 19 percent, whereas
the value of the hedged portfolio fell only 6 percent.
Table 20.2 (top) illustrates the concept of a short hedge using an equity futures
contract when it is at 1,140. Assume an investor has a portfolio of stocks valued
at $290,000 that he or she would like to protect against a market decline. By sell-
ing one futures contract also priced at 1,140, the investor has a short position of
$285,000, because the value of the contract is $250 times the index quote. As the
table illustrates, a decline in the stock market of 10 percent results in a loss on the
stock portfolio of $29,000 and a gain on the futures position of $28,500 (ignoring
commissions). Thus, the investor almost makes up on the short side what is lost on
the long side.
Long hedges The long hedger, while awaiting funds to invest, generally wishes to
reduce the risk of having to pay more for an equity position if prices rise. Potential
users of a long hedge include the following:
1. Institutions with a regular cash flow that use long hedges to improve the tim-
ing of their positions.
2. Institutions switching large positions who wish to hedge during the time it
takes to complete the process. (This could also be a short hedge.)
Limitations of hedging with stock-index futures Although hedging with stock-
index futures can reduce investor risk, risk cannot be eliminated completely. As with
interest rate futures, basis risk is present with stock-index futures. It represents the
difference between the price of the stock-index futures contract and the value of the
underlying stock index. A daily examination of stock-index values and stock-index
futures prices will show that each of the indexes quoted under the respective futures
contracts differs from the closing price of the contracts.
Examples of Short and Long Hedges Using Stock-Index Futures
Short Hedge
Current
Position
Position after a
10% Market Drop
Change in
Position
(Long position) $ value of portfolio $290,000 $261,000 $(29,000)
(Short position) sell one futures contract at 1140 285,000 256,500 28,500
Gain or loss from hedged position (500)
Long Hedge
Current
Position
Position or Cost Following
a 10% Market Rise
Change in Position
or Cost of Position
Buy three futures contracts at 1140 each $855,000 $940,500 $85,500
Cost of stock position 850,000 935,000 (85,000)
Gain or loss from hedged position 500
552 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
Basis risk, as it applies to stock portfolios, can be defined as the risk that remains
after a stock portfolio has been hedged. Note that stock-index futures hedge only
systematic (market) risk. That is, when we consider a stock portfolio hedged with
stock-index futures, the basis risk is attributable to unsystematic (nonmarket or
firm-specific) risk.
Index arbitrage and program trading A force of considerable magnitude hit
Wall Street in the 1980s. Program trading (defined in Chapter 4) captured much
attention and generated considerable controversy. It led to headlines attributing
market plunges to program trading, as happened on Black Monday, when the DJIA
fell over 21 percent.
The terms program trading and index arbitrage are often used together. In
general terms, index arbitrage refers to attempts to exploit differences between
the prices of stock-index futures and the prices of the stocks underlying the
futures contract. For example, if the S&P 500 futures price is too high relative
to the S&P 500, investors could short the futures contract and buy the stocks in
the index. In theory, arbitrageurs should be able to build a hedged portfolio
that earns arbitrage profits equaling the difference between the two positions.
If the price of the S&P 500 futures is deemed too low, investors could purchase
the futures and short the stocks, again exploiting the difference between the
two prices.
For investors to take advantage of discrepancies between the futures price and
the underlying stock price, they must act quickly. Program trading involves the use
of computer-generated orders to coordinate buy and sell orders for entire port-
folios based on arbitrage opportunities. The arbitrage is typically performed by
large institutional investors and occurs between portfolios of common stocks rela-
tive to index futures and options. The institutions generally enter positions in bas-
kets of securities worth several million dollars.
Normally, program traders and other speculators “unwind” their positions dur-
ing the last trading hour of the day the futures expire. At this time, the futures
premium goes to zero, because, as noted, the futures price at expiration must equal
the stock-index value.
Speculating with stock-index futures In addition to hedging strategies, inves-
tors can speculate with stock-index futures if they wish to profit from anticipated
stock market moves. Stock-index futures are effective instruments for speculating
on movements in the stock market because:
1. Minimal costs are involved in establishing a futures position.
2. Stock-index futures mirror the market, offering just as much risk.
One group of speculators, referenced as “active traders,” risk their capital on
price changes they expect to occur in futures contracts. Such individuals are often
sophisticated investors who seek the opportunity for large gains and understand the
risk they are assuming.
The strategies of active traders include long and short positions. Traders who
expect the market to rise (fall), buy (sell) index futures. Because of the high lever-
age, the profit opportunities are great; however, the loss opportunities are equally
great. Buying (selling) a contract is a convenient way to go long (short) the entire
market. It can be done at any time.
Index Arbitrage Exploita-
tion of price differences
between stock-index
futures and the stocks
underlying the futures
contract
Single Stock Futures 553
Another type of speculator is spreaders, who establish both long and short
positions at the same time. Their objective is to profit from changes in price rela-
tionships between two futures contracts. Spreads include the following:
1. The intramarket spread, also known as a calendar or time spread. This spread
combines contracts for two different settlement months, such as buying a
March contract and selling a June contract.
2. The intermarket spread, also known as a quality spread. This spread involves
two different markets, such as buying an S&P 500 contract and selling a
Nasdaq 100 contract (both for the same month).
Spreaders are interested in relative price as opposed to absolute price changes.
If two different contracts appear to be out of line, the spreader hopes to profit by
buying one contract and selling the other and waiting for the price difference to
adjust. This adjustment may require the spread between the two contracts to widen
in some cases and narrow in others.
Single Stock Futures
A more recent innovation in financial futures is the single stock futures (SSFs).
These are futures contracts on individual stocks as well as on exchange-traded funds
(ETFs) such as the DJIA, called DIAMONDS®. These futures are traded on One-
Chicago, a joint venture of the Chicago Board Options Exchange, the CME, and
the CBOT. OneChicago offers over 13,000 products representing claims on global
equities, including contracts on over 2,600 ETFs.
Like other futures contracts, SSFs are standardized agreements between two par-
ties to buy or sell 100 shares of a specified stock in the future at a price determined
today. The minimum price fluctuation (“tick”) is one cent per share, or $1 per
contract (contracts are for 100 shares). There are no daily price limits. The initial
margin requirement is 20 percent, providing substantial leverage for these contracts.
Note that SSFs settle to physical delivery rather than cash. The contract cannot be
exercised early. Of course, a contract can be offset prior to expiration.
Using SSFs An investor buys or “goes long” an SSF contract if he or she believes
that the stock price will rise and sells or “goes short” an SSF contract if the price is
expected to decline. Shorting is easily accomplished. As always with a futures con-
tract, both a buy and sell are involved, and which is done first really does not matter
in terms of the process working smoothly.
The primary advantages of SSFs are the low cost and ease with which short selling
can be accomplished. Some investors view the 20 percent margin requirement as an
advantage, but it can also be a significant disadvantage if the price moves against the
investor, particularly when multiple contracts are involved.
Assume that an investor buys 10 SSF contracts on
Microsoft at $100 and sells them two months later at
$110. The profit on this position is:
[ ] ,$ $ shares contracts $110 100 100 10 10 00
554 Chapter 20 Futures Contracts
How SSFs differ from stocks and options SSFs have price and risk profiles that
are similar to stocks. For example, if the stock price goes up, the futures price will
also go up. In contrast, the payoff profile for options is often nonlinear, consisting
of two or more different segments. In addition, options truncate the return distribu-
tion, while futures do not. Finally, there are several variables that affect the prices of
options, while futures prices are more straightforward.
SSFs are like any other futures in most respects and therefore differ from stocks.
Margin for futures represents funds to ensure that obligations are met, not funds
to finance part of the purchase. There is no interest to pay on the loan as is the
case with margin on stocks. Profits and losses are credited to an investor’s account
daily. SSF prices are often higher than the actual stock because the price of the SSF
includes the cost of interest.
The future of SSFs Because SSFs are a relatively recent innovation, it is difficult
to say how successful they will be and the total impact they will have on investors.
They clearly offer investors one more tool in hedging risk and constructing specific
risk–return profiles. At their introduction, some critics questioned their necessity,
or even desirability. However, it is worthwhile to remember that foreign currency
futures, ETFs, and stock-index futures were also attacked by critics at their introduc-
tion. Each has gone on to be quite successful. ETFs, for example, started slowly, but
total volume is now substantial.
Summary
• Futures markets play an important role in risk management.
• Spot markets are markets for immediate delivery. Forward and futures markets
are markets for deferred delivery.
• An organized futures exchange standardizes nonstandard forward contracts,
with only the price and number of contracts left for traders to negotiate.
• A futures contract designates a specific amount of a particular item to be deliv-
ered at a specified date in the future at a currently determined price.
• Buyers assume long positions and sellers assume short positions.
• Most contracts are settled by offsetting the position, whereby a position is
liquidated by an offsetting transaction. The clearinghouse is effectively on
the other side of every transaction and ensures that all payments are made as
specified.
• Contracts are traded on designated futures exchanges, which set minimum
price changes and establish daily price limits.
• Futures positions must be closed out within a specified time. There are no
certificates and no specialists to handle the trading.
• Margin, the norm in futures trading, is the “good faith” deposit made to
ensure completion of the contract.
Assume that an investor shorts 10 SSF contracts on
Microsoft at $100 and buys them back at $107. The loss
on this position is:
[ ] ,$ $ shares contracts $100 107 100 10 7 000
All futures contracts are marked to market daily; that is, all profits and losses
are credited and debited to each investor’s account daily.
• Hedgers buy or sell futures contracts to offset risk in some other position.
• Speculators buy or sell futures contracts in an attempt to earn a return. Specu-
lators are valuable to the proper functioning of the market.
• Interest rate futures, one of the principal types of financial futures, allow inves-
tors to hedge against, and speculate on, interest rate movements. Numerous
contracts are available on both domestic instruments and foreign instruments.
• Investors can execute short hedges to protect their long positions in assets.
• Stock-index futures are available on the NYSE Composite Index, the S&P 500,
and numerous other indexes, both domestic and foreign.
• Investors can use stock-index futures to hedge the systematic risk of common
stocks—that is, broad market movements.
• Short hedges protect a security position against a price decline, and long
hedges protect against having to pay more for a security because prices rise
before the investment can be made.
• Index arbitrage refers to attempts to exploit differences between prices of
stock-index futures and prices of the stocks underlying the futures contract.
• Single stock futures are standardized agreements between two parties to buy
or sell shares of a specified stock in the future at a price determined today
