197CHAPTER 8
Having learned about the impor-
tance of diversification, it seems log-
ical that there are limits to its use.
How many securities are enough?
How can you know if you have cho-
sen the right portfolio? How would
you respond if an advisor recom-
mends that you invest a sizeable
portion of your $1 million in a sin-
gle asset class, such as gold bullion?
We know that risk and return are
the key parameters to consider, but
how do we balance them against
each other? It seems prudent to
learn more about the formation
of optimal portfolios. Going fur-
ther, what about an overall plan to
ensure that all investment oppor-
tunities have been considered? It
is time to consider asset allocation,
one of the most important decisions when it comes to portfolio formation. Many of
the websites devoted to investing refer to asset allocation when discussing appropri-
ate investor actions. With a good asset allocation plan in place for your $1,000,000,
you will be able to sleep better at night.
Calculation of portfolio risk is a key issue in portfolio management, and risk
reduction through diversification is crucial to portfolio risk. Closely related to the
principle of diversification is the concept of asset allocation, which involves inves-
tor choices among asset classes, such as stocks, bonds, real estate, and cash equiva-
lents. The asset allocation decision is the most important single decision made by
investors in terms of the impact on portfolio performance.
Portfolio Selection
and Asset Allocation
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain the significance of the effi-
cient frontier and demonstrate how
an optimal portfolio of risky assets is
determined.
• Discuss the importance of the asset
allocation decision.
• Apply the Markowitz optimization
procedure to asset classes and
understand the practical implica-
tions of doing so.
• Explain how the total risk of a port-
folio can be broken into two com-
ponents
198 Chapter 8 Portfolio Selection and Asset Allocation
Building a Portfolio Using Markowitz
Principles
To select an optimal portfolio of assets using the Markowitz efficient frontier analy-
sis, an investor should:
1. Identify optimal risk–return combinations (the efficient set), available from
the set of risky assets under consideration, by using the Markowitz analysis.
This step uses as inputs the expected returns, variances, and covariances for
a set of securities.
2. Select the optimal portfolio from among those in the efficient set based on
the investor’s preferences.
In Chapter 9, we extend our Chapter 8 analysis and examine how investors can
invest in both risky assets and riskless assets. As you will see, the use of a risk-free
asset changes the investor’s ultimate portfolio position from that derived under the
Markowitz analysis.
Identify Optimal Risk–Return Combinations
As we saw in Chapter 7, even if portfolios are formed arbitrarily, some diversifica-
tion benefits are gained, which results in a reduction of portfolio risk. However, to
take the full information set into account, we use portfolio theory as developed by
Markowitz. Portfolio theory is normative, meaning that it tells investors how they
should act to diversify optimally. It is based on a small set of assumptions, including:
1. A single investment period, for example, one year.
2. Liquidity of positions; for example, there are no transaction costs.
3. Investor preferences are based only on a portfolio’s risk (as measured by vari-
ance or standard deviation) and expected return.
The Attainable Set of Portfolios
Markowitz’s approach to portfolio selection is that an investor should evaluate portfo-
lios on the basis of their risk and expected return. Therefore, we must first determine
the risk–return opportunities available to an investor from a given set of securities.
Figure 8.1 illustrates the opportunities available from a given set of securities. A large
number of possible portfolios exist when we realize that varying percentages of an
investor’s wealth can be invested in each of the assets under consideration.
The assets in Figure 8.1 constitute the attainable set of portfolios or the oppor-
tunity set. The attainable set includes all portfolios that could be formed from a
group of n securities. However, risk-averse investors should be interested only in
those portfolios with the lowest possible risk for any given level of return. All other
portfolios in the attainable set are inferior or dominated.
Efficient portfolios Markowitz was the first to derive the concept of an efficient port-
folio, defined as one that has the smallest risk for a given level of expected return or
the largest expected return for a given level of risk. Investors can identify efficient
portfolios by specifying an expected portfolio return and minimizing the portfolio
risk at this level of return. Alternatively, they can specify a portfolio risk level they are
willing to assume and maximize the expected return for this level of risk. Rational
Efficient Portfolio A port-
folio with the highest level
of expected return for a
given level of risk or the
lowest risk for a given level
of expected return
Building a Portfolio Using Markowitz Principles 199
investors will seek efficient portfolios because these portfolios are optimized on the
basis of the two dimensions of most importance to investors, expected return and risk.
Using the inputs described earlier—expected returns, variances, and covariances—
we can calculate the portfolio with the smallest variance, or risk, for a given level of
expected return. Given the minimum-variance portfolios, we can plot the minimum-
variance frontier as shown in Figure 8.1. Point A represents the global minimum-variance
portfolio because no other minimum-variance portfolio has a smaller risk. The bottom
segment of the minimum-variance frontier, AC, is dominated by portfolios on the
upper segment, AB. For example, since portfolio x has a larger return than portfolio
y for the same level of risk, investors would not want to own portfolio y.
The efficient set (frontier) The segment of the minimum-variance frontier
above the global minimum-variance portfolio, AB, offers the best risk–return com-
binations available to investors from this particular set of inputs. This segment is
referred to as the efficient set or efficient frontier of portfolios. The efficient set
is determined by the principle of dominance—portfolio x dominates portfolio y if it
has the same level of risk but a larger expected return, or the same expected return
but a lower risk.
• An efficient portfolio has the smallest risk for a given level of expected return
or the largest expected return for a given level of risk. All efficient portfolios
for a specified group of securities are referred to as the efficient set.
The arc AB in Figure 8.1 is the Markowitz efficient frontier. Note again that
expected return is on the vertical axis while risk, as measured by standard deviation,
is on the horizontal axis. There are many efficient portfolios on the arc AB (the
efficient frontier).
Understanding the Markowitz solution The solution to the Markowitz model
revolves around the portfolio weights, or percentages of funds invested in each
security. Because the expected returns, standard deviations, and correlation coef-
ficients for the securities being considered are inputs in the Markowitz analysis, the
portfolio weights are the only variable that can be manipulated to solve the portfolio
problem of determining efficient portfolios.
202 Chapter 8 Portfolio Selection and Asset Allocation
What effect does the addition of international stocks have on our diversification
analysis? Empirical studies confirm that at least historically, adding foreign stocks to
a portfolio reduced the overall volatility.
Bruno Solnik, a leading authority on international investing, notes that in the
past country factors dominated stock prices and the correlation of country factors
was weak. 4 This means equity markets around the world were in fact different,
and because of the low correlations, investors could reduce the total variance of
their portfolio by diversifying across countries. However, conditions have changed
as financial markets have become more integrated. There is enormous growth
in what is called cross-border mergers and acquisitions, which means, for exam-
ple, that a British company wishing to grow will buy the same type of business in
another country rather than buying another type of British company.
Correlations among country returns increased significantly starting around
1995, which diminished the benefits of risk reduction through diversification. By
2008, global equity correlations were historically high, and the MSCI-EAFE Index,
an international equity index, moved in unison with the S&P 500 about 90 percent
of the time. Even the MSCI Emerging Markets index was correlated with the S&P
500 at the 80 percent level.5
Some Important Conclusions about the
Markowitz Model
Five important points regarding the Markowitz portfolio selection model:
1. Markowitz portfolio theory is a two-parameter model because investors
are assumed to make decisions on the basis of two parameters,
expected return and risk. Thus, it is sometimes referred to as the mean-
variance model.
2. The Markowitz analysis generates an entire set, or frontier, of efficient port-
folios, all of which are equally “good.” No portfolio on the efficient frontier
dominates any other portfolio on the frontier.
3. The Markowitz model does not address the issue of investors using borrowed
money along with their own funds to purchase risky assets; that is, investors are
not allowed to use leverage. As we shall see in Chapter 9, allowing investors
to purchase a risk-free asset increases investor utility and leads to a different
efficient set.
4. In practice, different investors will estimate the inputs to the Markow-
itz model differently. This will produce different efficient frontiers. This
results from the uncertainty inherent in the security analysis part of
investments.
5. The Markowitz model remains cumbersome to work with because of the large
variance–covariance matrix needed for a set of stocks. For example, using
only 100 stocks the variance–covariance matrix has 10,000 terms in it.
4 These comments are based on Bruno Solnik, “Global Considerations for Portfolio Construction,” in
AIMR Conference Proceedings: Equity Portfolio Construction, Association for Investment Management and
Research, Charlottesville, VA, 2002, pp. 29–35.
5 Based on Alec Young, “Dwindling Diversification,” Standard & Poor’s The Outlook, 80, no. 43 (November
12, 2008): 5.
Selecting Optimal Asset Classes—The Asset Allocation Decision 205
stocks. Our group of asset classes is a nonexhaustive list, although it does encompass
the asset classes that most investors choose from.
1. International Equities Investment counselors regularly recommend that
investors diversify internationally by holding foreign securities. The rationale
is that such investing reduces portfolio risk because domestic and foreign
markets frequently do not move together. Furthermore, potential opportuni-
ties in other markets may be greater than those available in the United States.
U.S. investors have taken this rationale to heart. Whereas the average allo-
cation for international equities was about 15 percent in 2001, it was twice
that by 2011.
Historically, international diversification provided substantial risk-reducing
benefits due to the relatively low positive correlation between asset returns in
various countries. Numerous studies confirmed these relatively low correla-
tions, which led many in the investing business to recommend rather large
foreign holdings. More recent evidence suggests that the benefits of interna-
tional diversification have decreased as the correlation between U.S. stocks
and international stocks has increased. The increased correlation can be
attributed to the continuing integration of global markets.
The data reported in Table 8.1 shows that over the 40-year period ending
in 2010, the annual returns to foreign developed market equities (MSCI-EAFE
Index) are comparable to those of U.S. equities at approximately 11 percent.
Consider the period around the 2008 financial crisis. The
stock market hit a record high on October 9, 2007, and
officially entered a declining phase by June 30, 2008. The typical U.S. stock index
fund lost about 16 percent over this roughly nine-month period. In contrast, a
60 percent stock/40 percent bond portfolio lost only half that amount.
EXAMPLE 8.2
Annual Performance for Asset Classes and Correlation with U.S. Stocks through 2010
Correlation with U.S. Equities
Asset Class Start Date
Mean
Return (%)
Standard
Deviation (%) (1970–1990) (1990–2010)
U.S. equities 1970 10.92 15.72 1.00 1.00
Foreign equities
Developed market (EAFE) 1970 10.68 17.25 0.48 0.73
Emerging market 1988 16.20 24.18 0.29 0.69
Commodities (S&P GSCI) 1970 11.76 20.02 −0.06 0.13
Gold 1978 8.16 19.57 0.04 −0.06
Real estate (NAREIT) 1972 10.80 18.01 0.64 0.55
U.S. bonds 1976 8.16 5.68 0.34 0.15
Treasury bills (three month) 1970 6.00 1.04 −0.02 0.04
Note: Start dates for the return series vary based on data availability.
Source: Adapted from Exhibits 1 and 3 of “The Effectiveness of Asset Classes in Hedging Risk,” Luis Garcia-Feijoo, Gerald R. Jensen, and Robert R.
Johnson, Journal of Portfolio Management 38 (Spring 2012): 40–55.
TABLE 8.1
208 Chapter 8 Portfolio Selection and Asset Allocation
creation of a variety of commodity funds, has greatly increased investor inter-
est in commodity investments. The data in Table 8.1 show that, on average,
commodity investments have performed similarly to equities but with much
greater variability. Thus, their stand-alone performance has been relatively
poor. Commodities, however, have considerable appeal as an addition to a
portfolio due to their low correlation with equities. For example, the cor-
relation between the S&P GSCI Commodity Index and U.S. stocks over the
period from 1970 to 2010 was slightly below zero in the first 20 years, at −6
percent, and slightly above zero in the second 20 years, at 13 percent.
The tremendous investor interest in commodities spurred the creation of
numerous commodity funds, and by 2012, there were over 200 commodity
funds available to investors, a very large change from just a few years prior.
Concepts in Action
All That’s Gold Does Not Glitter
Should investors have an exposure to precious
metals in their portfolio? The consensus answer
to this question appears to be, yes. However,
investors are then left with a follow-up question,
how should they establish a precious metals
exposure? Jensen, Johnson, and Washer report
evidence indicating that the answer to this
second question is crucial in determining the
success that investors achieve with their precious
metals’ exposure. 10
Jensen et al. use gold as their proxy for pre-
cious metals due to gold’s dominance in the
market and its high correlation with other pre-
cious metal prices. Note, the largest gold fund is
over five times the size of the largest silver fund;
silver is the second most prominent precious
metal. The authors identify two fundamental
reasons investors include precious metals in their
portfolios:
1. they expect the price of precious metals to
appreciate,
2. they want to hedge against an adverse move
in the stock market.
The authors evaluate three basic types of
funds that provide investors with an exposure
to precious metals: bullion funds (hold physical
gold); synthetic funds (hold gold futures con-
tracts); and equity funds (hold the common
stock of gold mining firms). The table below
reports data for the top funds in each of the
three categories and is adapted from several of
the authors’ tables.
Performance of Largest Gold Fund in Each Fund Category: 2007–2016
Gold Price Bullion Fund Synthetic Fund Equity Fund
Total return over 10-year period 80.58% 74.31% 57.66% −44.75%
Annual standard deviation of return 18.67% 18.74% 18.74% 43.27%
Correlation with equities (S&P 500) NA 0.03 0.02 0.34
Weekly return during 5% worst weeks for equities NA −0.67% −0.64% −6.60%
The data in the table indicate that the price
of gold advanced by 80.58 percent over the
10-year study period. The performance of the
gold bullion fund aligned nicely with this price
movement advancing 74.31 percent. The
synthetic fund fell somewhat short, but still cap-
tured most of the upward movement in gold
prices. In stark contrast, the equity fund reported
a large negative return of −44.75 percent over
the full period. Furthermore, while the volatility of
10 The material presented here is adapted from Gerald R. Jensen, Robert R. Johnson, and Kenneth M.
Washer, “All That’s Gold Does Not Glitter,” Financial Analysts Journal 74 (First Quarter 2018): 59–76.
Selecting Optimal Asset Classes—The Asset Allocation Decision 209
Combining Asset Classes
As an indication of what can be accomplished by diversifying across asset classes,
consider a simple analysis whereby investors select mutual funds representing dif-
ferent asset classes. For example, funds are spread across asset classes such as blue-
chip stocks, small-cap stocks, international equities, domestic bonds, international
bonds, gold, and money market securities. Tests of such portfolios indicate that
they have outperformed the S&P 500 over long periods, and with less risk. And this
analysis relies on equal security weights rather than employing the Markowitz effi-
cient frontier technique. Presumably, the Markowitz optimization procedure could
improve the results obtained from this simple strategy.
Table 8.2 shows examples of efficient portfolios using the Markowitz optimiza-
tion technique. It contains return and risk data for “traditional” asset allocation
portfolios consisting of stocks (S&P 500), Treasury bonds, and T-bills, as well as
“nontraditional” portfolios which also include real estate and TIPS in the invest-
ment set. Notice that three different portfolios are shown: (1) a low-risk portfolio,
with a standard deviation of 5 percent; (2) a moderate-risk portfolio, with a standard
deviation of 10 percent; and (3) a high-risk portfolio, with a standard deviation of
15 percent.
The nontraditional portfolios can include all five assets, as opposed to three for
the traditional. As shown in Table 8.2, the standard deviations for both portfolios
are the same for each of three risk levels: 5, 10, and 15 percent. But note that the
expected returns are higher in each case for the nontraditional portfolio as com-
pared to the traditional portfolio.
For the traditional portfolios, an investor seeking low risk (5 percent standard
deviation) would place funds in each of the three major asset classes, ranging from
22.8 percent in stocks to 40.92 percent in T-bills. With a nontraditional portfolio,
four of the five asset classes would be held for a low-risk position, with no funds in
T-bills. In contrast, for the high-risk portfolio, funds are allocated only to stocks
and bonds with the traditional portfolio and only to stocks and real estate for the
nontraditional.
Figure 8.4 shows a plot of the efficient frontiers for the traditional and nontradi-
tional portfolios. Note that the end points are T-bills on the low end and stocks on the
the bullion and synthetic fund mirrored closely
the volatility in gold prices, the equity fund’s vola-
tility was more than double that of gold prices.
The final two rows of the table show that the
equity fund did not fare any better with regard
to its hedging potential as it followed the market
much more closely. The equity fund’s correlation
with the stock market was substantially higher at
34 percent versus a correlation of only 3 per-
cent for the bullion fund. As noted in Chapter 7,
securities with lower correlation provide greater
diversification benefits. Finally, the equity fund
was abysmal at protecting investors from extreme
negative stock market events. Specifically, the
average return for the S&P 500 during its worst
5 percent observations was −6.58 percent (not
shown in the table); shockingly, the equity fund
performance was even slightly worse at −6.60
percent. Thus, the fund expanded on negative
market shocks, rather than insulating investors
from the shocks.
The authors conclude that investors need to
be very careful when selecting a precious metals
fund. All the funds evaluated by the authors were
marketed as offering investors an exposure to
gold prices; however, it is very clear that the type
of exposure provided deviated substantial across
the funds. Clearly, all that’s gold does not glitter.
Asset Allocation and the Individual Investor 211
high end. As expected, the nontraditional efficient frontier plots above the traditional
efficient frontier. Thus, using the Markowitz analysis investors can determine efficient
portfolios by calculating the optimal allocations to each asset class being considered.
Asset Allocation and the Individual Investor
Individual investors must confront the asset allocation decision if they are to be
successful. Owning only a portfolio of stocks and not properly diversifying is a pre-
scription for poor, if not disastrous, investment performance. All investors should
diversify, simply because we live in an uncertain world, and proper diversification
eliminates some risk from owning stocks.
Chapter 7 should convince you that Markowitz diversification pays; that is, port-
folio risk is reduced by spreading investment across less than perfectly correlated
assets. Figure 8.4 makes a strong case for asset allocation by demonstrating that the
traditional efficient frontier using stocks, bonds, and money market securities is
improved with the addition of other asset classes that have low or negative correla-
tion with the traditional asset classes.
EXHIBIT 8.1 | Spread It Around
Diversifying May Help Reduce Risk In Your
Portfolio
Over the last few years, investors have learned a hard
lesson in market volatility. One small example: The S&P
500, which ended 2002 with a total return of −23.37 per-
cent, finished 2003 with a flourish, up 26.38 percent.
This dramatic one-year change in performance demon-
strates how much the financial markets can fluctuate.
Alas, performance ups and downs—whether over the
short or long term—are a given in the world of invest-
ing. And in a sharp market downturn, this volatility can
significantly shrink your holdings.
Certainly, last year’s rise in equity values came as a
great relief to investors after three years of steep stock
market declines. But with stock returns flat so far this
year and interest rates beginning to go back up, you
may wonder whether you want (or need) to adjust your
investment strategy.
When reviewing your portfolio, first realize that you
cannot predict how the markets will perform. As a result,
trying to “time” the market—attempting to guess which
way the markets will move and basing your investment
decisions on these predictions—is bound to fail, at least
most of the time.
Since market timing is not the answer, you need a
better approach for building your portfolio. A tried and
true method, based on substantial research, is to diversify
your money across different types of investments. “Given
the uncertainty of the markets, asset allocation, or dividing
holdings among different asset classes like stocks, bonds,
and real estate, provides a good way to manage risk and
to build a portfolio for the long term,” says Leonard
Govia, participant advice manager, TIAA-CREF. (How-
ever, diversification doesn’t guarantee against loss.)
The Birth of a Theory
The concept of asset allocation is based on modern
portfolio theory, which was developed in the 1950s by
the economist Harry M. Markowitz, who later shared a
Nobel Prize for his work. Markowitz measured the risk
inherent in various types of securities and developed
methods for combining investments to maximize the
trade-off between risk and return.
Basically, the theory says that investors shouldn’t view
the prospects of a particular security in isolation but
instead look at each investment and how it fits into an
overall portfolio. By combining securities that have a low
(or, better yet, negative) correlation with each other—that
is, securities that don’t perform in the same way under
similar market conditions—investors will create a less
risky portfolio than if they invested only in securities that
perform similarly (i.e., have a high correlation).
212 Chapter 8 Portfolio Selection and Asset Allocation
For investors, the asset allocation decision depends heavily on their time hori-
zon and their risk tolerance. Investors tend to be more comfortable with equi-
ties when they have long time horizons, given the year-to-year volatility of stocks.
Investors with a low tolerance for risk may maintain a relatively modest allocation
to stocks.
Asset allocation using stocks and bonds Let’s first consider owning the two
major asset classes that most investors are familiar with, stocks and bonds. Bonds
are the safer of the two assets, and this is why many investors allocate at least part of
their portfolio to bonds. Bonds historically have provided a lower return than stocks
but with considerably lower risk. The standard deviation for bonds has been roughly
40 percent of the standard deviation for stocks. A severe stock market decline such
as that of 2000–2002 and 2008 convinced a number of investors that they should
be holding bonds. Garcia-Feijoo et al. (2012) show that there is only a 5 percent
overlap between periods of disastrous stock market performance and negative per-
formance by bonds.
Table 8.3 shows the performance for 11 different portfolios that are formed with
varying proportions of stocks and bonds over the period from 1980 through 2013.
The table shows returns and standard deviations of portfolio combinations of stocks
and bonds in 10 percent increments. Clearly, risk and return go hand in hand. A
portfolio consisting of only stocks (the first row) has a higher return than does a
portfolio consisting of only bonds (the last row), or a portfolio consisting of 50 per-
cent stocks and 50 percent bonds. However, the risk of a 100 percent stock portfolio
is also higher than the alternatives.
Now consider the situation for an investor who because of his risk tolerance
really wishes to own a portfolio of bonds. The performance data in the table
indicates that the expected return on his portfolio is lower than that of a stock
“The advantage of diversifying investments is that
each type of security won’t react to the ups and downs of
the market in the same way,” says Govia. “So by diversi-
fying, you spread the risk in your portfolio around. The
result is a more balanced portfolio that can help you
withstand drops in the market.”
Other studies demonstrate the impact asset alloca-
tion has on volatility. For example, in a notable 10-year
study of large pension funds, Gary P. Brinson, L. Ran-
dolph Hood, and Gilbert Beebower found that, over
time, more than 90 percent of the variability of a port-
folio’s performance is due to allocation among specific
asset classes, while less than 5 percent of the variability of
performance results from investment selection.
Create a Portfolio For You
If diversification works, your next question may be,
“How do I ensure that my portfolio is right for my
needs?” Many investment companies give you a simple
way to develop an appropriate strategy: model portfo-
lios, diversified among asset classes like stocks, bonds,
and money markets, that are based on different risk tol-
erances, investment preferences, and “time horizons”
(the number of years you have to invest before needing
to use the money and how many years you’ll need that
money to last).
At TIAA-CREF, we’ve developed model portfo-
lios diversified among five asset classes—stocks, fixed
income, real estate, guaranteed, and money market—
for a variety of investor types. To ensure appropriate
diversification for retirement, our portfolios are diver-
sified among at least three asset classes, with one being
stocks; virtually all our after-tax mutual fund portfolios
are diversified among at least two asset classes, including
stocks.
Source: “Spread It Around,” Balance, Quarterly News and
Tools From TIAA-CREF, Summer 2004, pp. 10–11. Reprinted
by permission.
Asset Allocation and the Individual Investor 215
Concepts in Action
Making Asset Allocation Recommendations
for Investors
As noted previously, studies suggest that the
asset allocation decision accounts for more than
90 percent of return variance for large pension
fund portfolios. Many investors now regard asset
allocation as the most important decision in
determining the success of their portfolio.
How does asset allocation get implemented
in practice? Consider the model portfolios of
TIAA-CREF, one of the largest financial service
providers in the world. This organization provides
retirement planning and investment services for
a very large clientele.
TIAA-CREF illustrates several model portfolios
that accommodate a range of investor risk tol-
erances. For example, for a conservative investor
who emphasizes safety and stability, the follow-
ing asset allocation is recommended.
50% Guaranteed
50% TIAA Traditional
10% fixed income
10% CREF
Inflation-Linked Bond
10% real estate
10% TIAA Real Estate
30% equities
30% CREF Stock
30%
10%
10%
50%
Notice that 50 percent of the portfolio is allo-
cated to a guaranteed fund. Even so, 30 percent
is allocated to equities to provide some growth
opportunities over time.
What about a moderately aggressive investor
who seeks more growth possibilities while still
emphasizing stability? TIAA-CREF recommends
the following asset allocation:
60%
15%
10%
15%
15% guaranteed
15% TIAA traditional
10% Fixed income
10% CREF bond market
15% Real estate
15% TIAA real estate
60% Equities
60% CREF stock
216 Chapter 8 Portfolio Selection and Asset Allocation
Checking Your Understanding
4. Relative to Figure 8.4, what does it mean to say that an efficient frontier is
pushed out?
5. Explain why, using the bear markets of 2000–2002 or 2008, one can argue that
the asset allocation decision is the most important decision made by an investor.
The Impact of Diversification on Risk
The Markowitz analysis demonstrates that a portfolio’s standard deviation is less
than the weighted average of the standard deviations of the portfolio’s holdings.
Thus, diversification reduces portfolio’s holdings—as the number of portfolio
holdings increases, portfolio risk declines. In fact, almost half of an average stock’s
risk can be eliminated if the stock is held in a well-diversified portfolio.
Systematic and Nonsystematic Risk
Diversifiable (nonsystematic) risk Portfolio risk generally declines as more
stocks are added because we are eliminating the nonsystematic risk, or company-
specific risk. This is unique risk related to a particular company. However, the extent
of the risk reduction depends on the degree of correlation among the stocks. As a
The Impact of Diversification on Risk 217
general rule, correlations among stocks are positive, but less than 1.0. Adding more
stocks continues to reduce risk, but no matter how many partially correlated stocks
we add to the portfolio, we cannot eliminate all risk.
Nondiversifiable (systematic) risk Variability in a security’s total returns that
is directly associated with overall movements in the general market or economy
is called systematic risk, market risk, or nondiversifiable risk. Virtually all securi-
ties have some systematic risk because systematic risk directly encompasses the risk
of interest rate changes, recession, inflation, and so on. Most stocks are negatively
impacted by such factors; therefore, diversification cannot eliminate market risk.
After the nonsystematic risk is eliminated, what is left is the nondiversifiable por-
tion or market risk. This part of the risk is inescapable, because no matter how
well an investor diversifies, the risk of the overall market cannot be avoided. If the
stock market rises strongly, as it did in 2009, 2013, and 2017 most stocks appreciate
in value; if it declines sharply, as in 2001, 2002, and 2008 most stocks are adversely
affected. These movements occur regardless of what any single investment does.
Remember:
Total risk
Systematic risk
Nonsystematic risk
consists of two parts
Market risk
Nonmarket risk Diversifiable risk
Nondiversifiable risk
which are
Risk and the number of securities Investors can construct a diversified portfolio
and eliminate part of total risk, the diversifiable or nonmarket part. Figure 8.5 illus-
trates this concept of declining nonsystematic risk in a portfolio. As more securities
are added, the nonsystematic risk becomes smaller, and portfolio total risk approaches
its systematic risk. Since diversification cannot reduce systematic risk, total portfolio
risk can be reduced no lower than the total risk of the market portfolio.
Diversification can substantially reduce the unique risk of a portfolio. However,
Figure 8.5 indicates that no matter how much we diversify, we cannot eliminate
systematic risk. The declining total risk curve levels off and at most becomes asymp-
totic to the systematic risk. Clearly, market risk is critical to all investors. It plays a
central role in asset pricing because it is the risk that investors value.
How Many Securities Are Needed to Fully Diversify?
A study done by Evans and Archer in 1968 is often cited in answering the question of
how many securities are needed to have a well-diversified portfolio.11 Their analysis
suggested as few as 15 stocks could be adequate. Thus, based on studies done in the
Systematic Risk Risk
attributable to broad
macrofactors affecting all
securities
11 See John Evans and Stephen Archer, “Diversification and the Reduction of Dispersion: An Empirical
Analysis,” Journal of Finance, 23 (1968): 761–767.

The Implications of Reducing Risk by
Holding Portfolios
The construction of optimal portfolios and the selection of the best portfolio have
implications for the pricing of financial assets. As we saw in the previous discus-
sion, part of the riskiness of the average stock can be eliminated by holding a well-
diversified portfolio. This means that part of a stock’s risk can be eliminated and part
cannot. Investors need to focus on that part of the risk that cannot be eliminated by
diversification because this is the risk that should be priced in the financial markets.
The relevant risk of an individual stock is its contribution to the riskiness of a well-
diversified portfolio. The return that should be expected on the basis of this contribu-
tion can be estimated by the capital asset pricing model, which we consider in Chapter 9.
Summary
• Markowitz portfolio theory provides a means to select optimal portfolios based
on using the full information set about securities.
• The expected returns, standard deviations, and correlation coefficients are
inputs in the Markowitz analysis. Therefore, the portfolio weights are the vari-
able manipulated to determine efficient portfolios.
• An efficient portfolio has the highest expected return for a given level of risk,
or the least risk for a given level of expected return.
• The Markowitz analysis determines the set of efficient portfolios, all of which
are equally desirable. The efficient set is an arc in expected return—standard
deviation space.
• The efficient frontier captures the optimal potential portfolios that exist from
a given set of securities. Indifference curves express investor preferences.
• The optimal portfolio for a risk-averse investor occurs at the point of tangency
between the investor’s highest indifference curve and the efficient set of port-
folios.
Total risk
Risk of portfolio
(standard deviation of return)
Unsystematic risk
Systematic
risk
0 10 20 30 40
Number of securities in portfolio
50
1990s
1960s
FIGURE 8.6 Diversification and the number of securities
Source: From “How Much Diversification is Enough!” by Burton Malkiel from the CFA Institute Conference and Pro-
ceedings EQUITY PORTFOLIO CONSTRUCTION. Copyright © 2002, CFA Institute. Reproduced and Republished
from Equity Portfolio Construction with Permission from CFA Institute. All Rights Reserved.
220 Chapter 8 Portfolio Selection and Asset Allocation
Problems
8.1 Given the following information:
Standard deviation for stock X = 12 percent
Standard deviation for stock Y = 20 percent
Expected return for stock X = 16 percent
Expected return for stock Y = 22 percent
Correlation coefficient between X and Y = 0.30
The covariance between stocks X and Y is:
(a) 0.048
(b) 72.00
(c) 3.60
(d) 105.6
• The asset allocation decision refers to the allocation of portfolio assets to broad
asset classes; in other words, how much of the portfolio to invest in stocks,
bonds, real estate, money market assets, and so forth. Each weight can range
from 0 to 100 percent. Asset allocation is one of the most widely used applica-
tions of Markowitz analysis.
• In addition to being applied to individual securities, the Markowitz analysis
can be applied to asset classes to determine optimal portfolios. Efficient fron-
tiers involving asset classes can be generated.
• Diversification can substantially reduce the unique risk of a portfolio. How-
ever, no matter how much we diversify, we cannot eliminate systematic risk.
Therefore, systematic (market) risk is critical to all investors.
• New research indicates that it takes substantially more stocks to diversify ade-
quately than has previously been thought. This number appears to be at least
40 and could be more.
• The relevant risk of an individual stock is its contribution to the riskiness of a
well-diversified portfolio.
