421CH APTER 16
You have probably heard people
mention technical analysis, which
is an approach that is widely used
in investments. Technical analysis
is very popular and strongly advo-
cated by a significant group of inves-
tors, who are frequently identified
as technical analysts or chartists.
While technical analysis is very pop-
ular among some investors, other
investors contend the approach
lacks any merit. For example, the
following quote is attributed to
renowned investor Ralph Seger,
“One way to end up with $1 million
is to start with $2 million and use
technical analysis.”
Given these two strongly oppos-
ing views regarding technical analy-
sis, it is important that you learn the
basics of the approach so that you
can make an informed decision regarding its merits. Whether or not you decide
to apply technical trading rules in managing your portfolio, it is important that
you are knowledgeable about the approach. Understanding alternative investment
approaches, along with their pros and cons, is crucial to becoming a successful
investor.
After learning the basics of technical analysis and the various technical trading
rules, I think that you will discover that most investors rely on technical analysis to
at least a limited extent, whether they will admit it or not. For example, one of the
most widely reported and discussed pieces of information for a stock is its price
range, generally reported as the stock’s 52-week high and low price. This bit of
information is a very basic technical indicator that is universally surveyed, even by
investors that are technical analysis cynics. Once you have learned about technical
analysis, I think you will find that many technical tools and techniques have become
integral parts of the investments’ practice and vocabulary. In addition, changes in
the financial markets are helping to promote increased use of technical analysis
among investors.
Technical Analysis
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain how technical analysis dif-
fers from fundamental analysis.
• Critically evaluate the most
prominent techniques used in
technical analysis, as well as the
claims supporting these tech-
niques.
• Decide what role technical analysis
might play in your own investing
program.
• Describe the relation between
technical analysis, behavioral
finance, and the efficient market
hypothesis (EMH).
422 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
Introduction
Traditionally, stocks have been selected using two major approaches:
• Fundamental analysis
• Technical analysis
Technical analysis is quite different from the fundamental approach to security
analysis discussed in the last three chapters. How different? Consider the following
quotes from popular press articles on technical analysis:
Engage a technical analyst in a conversation about his art, and you soon feel like you’re
in the shadowy saloon from Star Wars, where freakish aliens lounge about speaking
strange languages.1
Spend some time with a technical analyst and you almost need a Technical-to-English
translation guide. Conversations are full of references to support and resistance levels,
Fibonacci retracements, double bottoms, and moving averages.2
Although the technical approach to common stock selection is the oldest
approach (dating back to the late 1800s), it remains controversial. The techniques
discussed in this chapter appear at first glance to have considerable merit, because
they seem intuitive and plausible, but many of them have been severely challenged
in the last three decades by evidence supporting the efficient market hypothesis
(EMH). The extensive evidence concerning market efficiency challenges the valid-
ity of technical analysis and the likelihood of its success.
Those learning about investments will be exposed to technical analysis because
numerous investors, investment advisory firms, and the popular press discuss it and
use it. Furthermore, it may produce some insights into the psychological dimen-
sion of the market. In fact, technical analysis is interrelated with behavioral finance,
which is becoming increasingly popular in investments. In effect, technical indica-
tors are being used to measure investor emotions.
Even if this approach is not effective, many investors act as if it is productive.
Therefore, the prudent course of action is to study this topic and try to make an
objective evaluation of its validity and usefulness. At the very least, an informed
investor is in a better position to interpret analyst comments and judge their valid-
ity. Technical analysis can be applied to any type of security, but the most popular
applications are to common stocks. Therefore, we restrict our discussion in this
chapter to the stock market.
What Is Technical Analysis?
Martin J. Pring, in his book Technical Analysis, states: “The technical approach to
investing is essentially a reflection of the idea that prices move in trends which are
determined by the changing attitudes of investors toward a variety of economic,
monetary, political, and psychological forces. The art of technical analysis—for it
is an art [emphasis added]—is to identify trend changes at an early stage and to
1 See Michael Hirson, “Reading the Tea Leaves,” Individual Investor (January 2001): 96.
2 See Karen Talley, “Some Technical Analysts Fall off the Charts,” The Wall Street Journal (February 20,
2002): B5.
What Is Technical Analysis? 423
maintain an investment posture until the weight of the evidence indicates that the
trend is reversed.”3
• Technical analysis can be defined as the use of specific market-generated data
for the analysis of aggregate and individual stock prices.
Technical analysis is sometimes called market or internal analysis because it uti-
lizes market data to attempt to assess the demand for, and supply of, shares of a
stock, or the entire market. Thus, technical analysts believe that the market itself is
its own best source of data—as they say, “let the market tell its own story.” The theory
of technical analysis is that a security’s price movement captures the information
about that security.
Economics teaches us that prices are determined by the interaction of demand
and supply. Technicians do not disagree but argue that it is extremely difficult to
assess all the factors that influence demand and supply. Since not all investors are
in agreement on price, the determining factor is the net demand for a stock based
on how many investors are optimistic or pessimistic. Furthermore, once the bal-
ance of investors becomes optimistic (pessimistic), this mood is likely to continue
for the near term and can be detected by various technical indicators. As the chief
market technician of one New York firm says, “All I care about is how people feel
about those particular stocks as shown by their putting money in and taking their
money out.” 4
• Technical analysis is based on market data as opposed to fundamental data,
such as earnings, sales, growth rates, and government regulations.
Market data primarily include price and volume data for a stock or a market
index. Many technical analysts believe that market data, as opposed to fundamental
data, is more relevant for stock prices. They argue that accounting data are subject
to all types of limitations and ambiguities, an argument that was strengthened by the
Enron debacle and other accounting flaps over the years.
Recall that in fundamental analysis, the discount models and the multiplier
approach produce estimates of a stock’s intrinsic value, which is then compared to
the market price. Fundamentalists believe that their data, properly evaluated, can
be used to estimate the intrinsic value of a stock. Technicians, on the other hand,
believe that it is extremely difficult to estimate intrinsic value and virtually impos-
sible to obtain and analyze good information consistently. In particular, they are
dubious about the value to be derived from an analysis of published financial state-
ments. Instead, they focus on market data as an indication of the forces of supply
and demand for a stock or the market.
Technicians believe that the process by which prices adjust to new information is
one of a gradual adjustment toward a new (equilibrium) price. As the stock adjusts
from its old equilibrium level to its new level, the price tends to move in a trend.
The central concern is not why the change is taking place but rather the fact that it
is taking place. Technical analysts believe that stock prices show identifiable trends
that can be exploited by investors. They seek to identify changes in a stock’s direc-
tion and take a position to take advantage of the trend.
The following points summarize technical analysis:
1. Technical analysis is based on market (internal) data for the aggregate mar-
ket, an industry average, or a stock. In contrast, fundamental analysis focuses
424 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
on those factors that affect firm cash flows, which are external to market price
and volume data.
2. The focus of technical analysis is identifying changes in the direction of stock
prices, which tend to move in trends as the stock price adjusts to a new equi-
librium level. Changes in price trends can be detected by studying the action
of price movements and trading volume across time.
3. Technicians assess the overall situation concerning stocks by analyzing techni-
cal indicators, such as breadth of market, market sentiment, and momentum.
4. Technicians tend to emphasize “trading” stocks to take advantage of pre-
dicted price movements; the trades often involve taking short-term positions.
The idea is to time the appropriate trade. In contrast, fundamental analysts
generally emphasize making an advantageous “investment” decision that is
long term in nature.
• The bottom line for technical analysis: Stock prices tend to move in trends.
Such trends can be spotted by careful analysis and acted upon by buying and
selling.
A Framework for Technical Analysis
Technical analysis can be applied to market and industry indexes as well as indi-
vidual stocks. Technical analysis includes the use of graphs, charts, and technical
indicators. Figure 16.1 depicts the technical analysis approach to investing.
Price and volume are the primary tools of the technical analyst, and the chart
is the most important mechanism for displaying this information. Technicians
believe that the forces of supply and demand result in particular patterns of
price behavior, the most important of which is the trend or overall direction
in price. Using a chart, the technician hopes to identify trends and patterns in
stock prices that provide trading signals.
Volume data are used to gauge general market conditions. The evidence seems
to suggest that rising (falling) stock prices are usually associated with rising (falling)
volume. When stock prices rise but volume activity does not keep pace, technicians
are skeptical about the upward trend. An upward surge on contracting volume is
particularly suspect. A downside movement from some pattern or holding point,
accompanied by heavy volume, is taken as a bearish sign.
Investments Insight
Technicians believe that prices move in trends
that are determined by changes in investor
attitudes toward various factors, including
psychological factors. They believe that investor
emotions influence stock prices. Therefore, it is rea-
sonable to think there is a connection between
technical analysis and behavioral finance. As
one senior portfolio manager put it, “Prices do not
move only in a random walk but show trends that
can be exploited. Behavioral finance does not tell
you what to do to exploit these trends, but it can
explain why certain strategies or tools may work.
424 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
on those factors that affect firm cash flows, which are external to market price
and volume data.
2. The focus of technical analysis is identifying changes in the direction of stock
prices, which tend to move in trends as the stock price adjusts to a new equi-
librium level. Changes in price trends can be detected by studying the action
of price movements and trading volume across time.
3. Technicians assess the overall situation concerning stocks by analyzing techni-
cal indicators, such as breadth of market, market sentiment, and momentum.
4. Technicians tend to emphasize “trading” stocks to take advantage of pre-
dicted price movements; the trades often involve taking short-term positions.
The idea is to time the appropriate trade. In contrast, fundamental analysts
generally emphasize making an advantageous “investment” decision that is
long term in nature.
• The bottom line for technical analysis: Stock prices tend to move in trends.
Such trends can be spotted by careful analysis and acted upon by buying and
selling.
A Framework for Technical Analysis
Technical analysis can be applied to market and industry indexes as well as indi-
vidual stocks. Technical analysis includes the use of graphs, charts, and technical
indicators. Figure 16.1 depicts the technical analysis approach to investing.
Price and volume are the primary tools of the technical analyst, and the chart
is the most important mechanism for displaying this information. Technicians
believe that the forces of supply and demand result in particular patterns of
price behavior, the most important of which is the trend or overall direction
in price. Using a chart, the technician hopes to identify trends and patterns in
stock prices that provide trading signals.
Volume data are used to gauge general market conditions. The evidence seems
to suggest that rising (falling) stock prices are usually associated with rising (falling)
volume. When stock prices rise but volume activity does not keep pace, technicians
are skeptical about the upward trend. An upward surge on contracting volume is
particularly suspect. A downside movement from some pattern or holding point,
accompanied by heavy volume, is taken as a bearish sign.
Investments Insight
Technicians believe that prices move in trends
that are determined by changes in investor
attitudes toward various factors, including
psychological factors. They believe that investor
emotions influence stock prices. Therefore, it is rea-
sonable to think there is a connection between
technical analysis and behavioral finance. As
one senior portfolio manager put it, “Prices do not
move only in a random walk but show trends that
can be exploited. Behavioral finance does not tell
you what to do to exploit these trends, but it can
explain why certain strategies or tools may work.”5
5 Stephen Brown, “The Behavioral Connection,” CFA Magazine (March/April 2006): 45.
Stock Price and Volume Techniques 425
Technical analysis has evolved over time, so that today it involves more than sim-
ply charting individual stocks or the market. In particular, technical indicators are
used to assess market conditions (breadth) and investor sentiment. It also includes
“contrary analysis,” which is an intellectual process more than a technique. The
idea behind contrary analysis is to go against the crowd when the crowd starts
thinking alike.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Some technical analysts claim they can conduct their analysis without know-
ing the name of the stock being evaluated. Explain.
2. How useful is a stock’s intrinsic value to a technical analyst?
Stock Price and Volume Techniques
The Dow Theory
The oldest and best-known theory of technical analysis is the Dow theory, originally
developed in the late l800s by the editor of The Wall Street Journal, Charles H. Dow,
who many regard as the father of technical analysis. Although Dow developed the
theory to describe past price movements, William Hamilton followed up by using
it to predict movements in the market. (It is not concerned with individual securi-
ties.) The Dow theory was very popular in the 1920s and 1930s, and articles offering
support for it still appear periodically in the literature. Several investment advisory
services are based on the Dow theory.
Stock Price and Volume Techniques 427
downturn or new bear market has begun, although it is subject to confirmation.
What serves as a confirmation is up to each Dow theory user to determine.
• The Dow theory is intended to forecast the start of a primary movement, but
it does not tell us how long the movement will last.
The Dow theory is subject to a number of criticisms, and investors continue to
debate its merits. Studies of its success rate have been disappointing; for example,
some indicate that investors would have been more successful following a buy-and-
hold policy. Today’s economy is vastly different from the one that existed when
the theory was developed. In addition, confirmations are slow to arrive, difficult to
interpret, and ambiguous.
• A problem with the Dow theory is that several versions are available. Its users
interpret the theory in various ways; therefore, it may predict different (and
conflicting) movements at the same time.
Charts of Price Patterns
To assess stock-price movements, technicians generally rely on charts or graphs of
price movements and on relative strength analysis. The charting of price patterns
is one of the classic technical analysis techniques. Technicians believe that stock
prices move in trends, with price changes forming patterns that can be recognized
and categorized. By visually assessing the forces of supply and demand, technicians
hope to be able to predict the likely direction of future movements. The most basic
measure of a stock’s direction is the trend line, which simply shows the direction
the stock is moving. If demand is increasing more rapidly than supply and the stock
shows successively higher low and high points, it is in an uptrend. Consistently lower
highs and lows indicate that supply is increasing more rapidly and the stock is in a
downtrend. Obviously, investors seek to buy in an uptrend and sell in a downtrend.
Technicians seek to identify signals in a chart of stock prices and use certain ter-
minology to describe the events. A support level is the price level (or more correctly
price range) at which a technician expects a significant increase in the demand for
a stock—in other words, a lower bound on price where it is expected that buyers
will act, supporting the price and preventing additional price declines. A resistance
level, on the other hand, is the price level (range) at which a technician expects a sig-
nificant increase in the supply of a stock—in other words, an upper bound on price
where sellers are expected to act, providing a resistance to any further price increase.
Figure 16.3 illustrates support and resistance levels. As the stock approaches $10
per share, it encounters a resistance level and drops back below this price. Con-
versely, as it approaches slightly less than $6 per share, it gains support and eventu-
ally rises. If the stock breaks through the resistance level on heavy volume, this is
taken as a very bullish sign and is referred to as a breakthrough.
Support levels tend to develop when profit taking causes a reversal in a stock’s
price following an increase. Investors who did not purchase earlier are now willing
to buy at this price, which becomes a support level. Resistance levels tend to develop
after a stock declines from a higher level. Investors are waiting to sell the stocks at
a certain recovery point. At certain price levels, therefore, a significant increase in
supply occurs, and the price will encounter resistance if it moves beyond this level.
As noted, a trend line is a line drawn on a chart to identify a trend. If a trend exhib-
its support and resistance levels simultaneously that appear to be well defined, the
trend lines are referred to as channel lines, and price is said to move between the upper
channel line and the lower channel line. Momentum is used to indicate the speed with
Trend Line A line on the
chart of a security indicat-
ing the general direction
in which the security’s
price is moving
Support Level A price
level at which a techni-
cian expects a significant
increase in the demand
for a stock
Resistance Level A price
level at which a techni-
cian expects a significant
increase in the supply of
a stock
Stock Price and Volume Techniques 429
in Figure 16.4 the strong uptrend occurring over a period of months. This trend
ended with a rally on high volume (at point 1 in the figure) that forms part of the
left shoulder of a famous chart pattern called a head-and-shoulders pattern.
The left shoulder shows initially strong demand followed by a reaction on lower
volume (2) and then a second rally, with strong volume, carrying prices still higher
(3). Profit taking again causes prices to fall to the so-called neckline (4), thus com-
pleting the left shoulder. (The neckline is formed by connecting previous low
points.) A rally occurs, but this time on low volume, and again prices sink back
to the neckline. This is the head (5). The last step is the formation of the right
shoulder, which occurs with light volume (6). Growing weakness is identified as the
price approaches the neckline. A downside breakout occurs (7), which technicians
consider to be a sell signal.
What about other patterns? Technicians have considered a very large number of
such patterns. Example patterns include flags, pennants, gaps, triangles of various
types, the inverted saucer or dome, the triple top, the compound fulcrum, the rising
(and falling) wedge, the broadening bottom, the duplex horizontal, rectangles, and
the inverted V. Figure 16.5 shows the set of price patterns proposed as most impor-
tant for investors to recognize.
Four phases
Distribution
Markup Markdown
AccumulationAccumulation
Price
Time
Trend line
Price
Time
Triangle
Price
Time
Flag
Price
Time
Double top
Price
Time
Wedge
Price
Time
FIGURE 16.5 Important price patterns for investors using charts
Source: Jonathan Butler, “Technical Analysis: A Primer,” Worth, October 1995, p. 133. Reprinted by Permission
of Worth Magazine.
430 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
Obviously, numerous patterns are possible and can usually be found on a chart
of stock prices. It is also obvious that price patterns are much easier to identify in
hindsight than when they are actually occurring.
Point-and-figure charts Technicians also use point-and-figure charts. This type
of chart shows only significant price changes, and volume is not shown at all. The
user determines what constitutes a significant price change and price reversal ($1,
$2, etc.). Although the horizontal axis still depicts time, specific calendar time is not
particularly important—the passage of time is basically ignored. (Some chartists do
show the month in which changes occur.)
An X is typically used to show an upward movement, whereas an O is used for a
downward movement. Each X or O represents $1 movements, $2 movements, $5
movements, and so on, depending on how much movement is considered signifi-
cant for that stock. An X or O is recorded only when the price moves by the speci-
fied amount. Figure 16.6 illustrates a point-and-figure chart.
A point-and-figure chart is designed to compress many price changes into a
small space. By doing so, areas of “congestion” can be identified. A congestion
area is a compacted area of price fluctuations (i.e., a closely compacted horizon-
tal band of Xs and Os). The technician studies a congestion area in search of
a “breakout,” which indicates an expected upward or downward movement in
stock price.
Candlestick charts Developed in Japan, the candlestick chart is very sim-
ilar to the bar chart; however, it adds several pieces of information that are
considered noteworthy by some technical analysts. By transforming a bar into
a candle with a wick at each end, a candlestick chart is able to add trading
information.
The extreme end of each candle wick represents the respective high and low
price for the stock, whereas the top and bottom of the candle wax identify the open-
ing and closing price. Finally, if the candle is filled in (solid black), it indicates that
the stock closed down for the day, that is, the opening price was above the closing
price. Of course, a clear candle indicates an up day for the stock.
Point- and- Figure Chart A
plot of stock prices show-
ing only significant price
changes
40
35
30
Price
25
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X
X
X
X X
X
X
X
X
0
0
X
X
X
6
0
0
0
2
0
0X
1
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
0
3
0
0
0
0 X
X
X
X
X
X
X
XX
X
X X
X
X
X
X
0
0
7
X
X
X
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0
8
0
00
5
X
X
X
0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0
0
4
0 0
0
0
0
20
Time
FIGURE 16.6 A point-and-figure chart for Gigantic Computers. X = $1 upward price change, O = $1
downward price change (numbers indicate months)
Checking Your Understanding 431
Some evidence on price charts There are many chart patterns, and tech-
nicians analyze and interpret these patterns. It is impossible to demonstrate
conclusively the lack of predictive significance in all of the variations used
in charting.
Levy studied the predictive significance of “five-point” chart patterns.6 A five-
point chart pattern is one with two highs and three lows, or two lows and three highs.
As Levy noted, “The avid chartist will recognize, among the 32 patterns, several
variations of channels, wedges, diamonds, symmetrical triangles, head and shoul-
ders, reverse head and shoulders, triple tops, and triple bottoms. Each of these
formations allegedly reflects underlying supply/demand and support/resistance
conditions that have implications as to future price behavior. A common belief
among chartists is that the appearance of certain patterns followed by a ‘breakout’
gives a profitable buy or sell signal.”
Levy’s results indicate that although some patterns did produce better results
than others, none performed very differently from the market. When brokerage
commissions were deducted, none of the 32 patterns was found to have any “profit-
able forecasting ability.” The really surprising conclusion of his study, however, was
that “the best performing patterns would probably be characterized as bearish by
most technicians, and conversely, the worst performing patterns would, in two of
the three cases, be characterized as bullish.”
Opinions about charting vary widely. Since the evidence is not conclusive—at
least to everyone’s satisfaction—the controversy continues.
Checking Your Understanding
3. Suppose someone tells you that they use the Dow theory regularly and that
it provides them with valuable information. They urge you to do the same.
What objections might you raise against doing this?
4. What are the implications of the EMH for technical analysts practicing the
charting of stock prices?
Concepts in Action
Using Technical Analysis When Making
Investing Decisions
The average investor can easily access charts
and graphs of individual stocks and the market.
While numerous services provide this type of
information at a cost, the average investor can
probably find what he or she wants at no cost.
Start with Yahoo! Finance. Entering the stock
symbol for a company, a page comes up with a
small chart showing one day’s price activity. The
chart can be viewed as a bar chart, a line chart,
or a candlestick chart. By clicking on “Technical
Analysis,” an investor can construct various
moving averages around the stock’s price
432 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
Moving Averages
A moving average of prices is a popular technique for analyzing both the overall
market and individual stocks.
Several days of closing prices are chosen to calculate a moving average. A new
value for the moving average is then calculated by dropping the earliest observa-
tion and adding the latest one. This process is repeated daily (or weekly). The
resulting moving average line supposedly represents the basic trend of stock
prices. Moving averages smooth data, tending to eliminate or soften outliers in
price data.
Three major decisions have to be made in constructing a moving average; fur-
thermore, each of the three involves several alternatives:
1. The time period over which the average is calculated. This decision has the great-
est impact on the moving average. A well-known average for identifying major
trends is the 200-day moving average, and a 10-week average is popular for
identifying intermediate trends. Shorter trends can be captured by 10-, 20-,
50-, and 100-day averages. The 200-day moving average is less volatile than
shorter-term moving averages.
2. The price used. Although closing prices are often used, sometimes the open,
high, low, and close prices are used in different configurations.
3. The type of moving average used. A simple moving average is often used, but
alternatives include a weighted average and an exponential average. The lat-
ter two place greater weight on recent price activity, while the simple moving
average places equal weight on each day’s price activity.
A comparison of the current market price to the moving average produces a buy
or sell signal. A buy signal is generated when price rises through the moving average
on high volume, with the opposite applying to a sell signal. Specific signals of a sell
signal are the following:
1. Actual price is below the moving average, advances toward it, does not pen-
etrate the average, and starts to turn down again.
2. Following a rise, the moving average flattens out or declines, and the price
penetrates it from the top.
3. The stock price rises above the moving average line while the line is still
falling.
Buy signals are generated if these situations are turned upside down.
Figure 16.7 shows Coca-Cola plotted daily with both a 200-day moving average
and a 50-day moving average. Volume is shown at the bottom of the chart. Various
movements. Furthermore, various indicators and
overlays can be added. The average investor
can probably accomplish what they want at this
one site.
Another well-known source of charts for stocks
can be found at www.bigcharts.com. One can
construct various charts and also quickly link to
analysts information, insider statistics, news about
the company, and so forth.
Effective charts can be quickly assembled at
www.stockcharts.com. This site has some inter-
esting tools, among them its “Carpets” diagrams.
The bottom line for investors when it comes to
looking at, or using, charts is that such data can
be accessed on numerous sites. Most investors
who wish to use this type of analysis would be
well advised to select one or two such sites and
become familiar with what they offer
Checking Your Understanding 433
publications and websites offer plots of moving averages for both individual stocks
and market indexes.
Investors should remember that moving averages show what prices have already
done, not what they will do. Regardless of how it is constructed, the moving average
always reflects what has already happened.
A variation of the moving average popular on some websites is the moving average
convergence divergence, or MACD. This involves a longer moving average (such as
the 200-day) and a shorter moving average (such as the 50-day). As stock price rises,
a bullish signal is generated if the short-term average consistently is greater than the
long-term average. A warning signal is generated when the short-term average falls
below the long-term average.
Relative Strength
A well-known technique used for individual stocks (or industries) is relative strength
analysis. The relative strength for a stock is the ratio of the stock’s price relative to
a market index, or an industry index, or the average historical price of the stock.
Relative strength can also be calculated as the ratio of an industry average relative
to the market. These ratios can be plotted to form a graph of relative prices across
time. In effect, the graph shows the strength of the stock relative to its industry, the
market, or whatever. According to a chief market analyst at Merrill Lynch, “Very
often changes in trend, from good to bad or from bad to good, will be preceded by
a change in the stock’s relative performance.”7
A stock’s relative strength may be of use in forecasting.8 Because trends are
assumed to continue for some time, a rising ratio (an upward-sloping line) indicates
Relative Strength The
ratio of a stock’s price to
some market or industry
index, usually plotted as a
graph
KO
50-day MA
200-day MA
Volume
May 11 Jul 11 Sep 11 Nov 11 Jan 12
Mar 02, 2012
Mar 12
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
30.0
20.0
10.0
Millions
0.0
FIGURE 16.7 A full screen shot from Yahoo! Finance showing a chart of Coca-Cola with two moving
averages, a 50-day average and a 200-day average (the smoother line)
Source: Reproduced with the Permission of Yahoo! Inc. Copyright © 2012 by Yahoo! Inc.
434 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
relative strength. That is, it indicates that the stock is outperforming the market and
that may continue. In contrast, a declining ratio has negative implications for the
stock. One rule of thumb is that a stock is attractive when the relative strength has
improved for at least four months, but as with most technical indicators, technicians
interpret these signals in different ways.
Figure 16.8 shows relative performance for Coca-Cola by plotting the ratio of
closing monthly prices for Coke to closing monthly prices for the S&P 500. During
this period, Coca-Cola’s stock price generally increased as did the S&P 500 value.
However, relative to Coke, the market performed better from beginning to end
and, therefore, Coca-Cola’s relative strength declined over the period.
Relative strength is often used by technicians to identify industries or sectors that
look attractive, prior to selecting individual stocks. This is in line with our analysis in
Part 4 which supports a top-down approach to security analysis, with industry analy-
sis preceding company analysis. By focusing on the selection of promising indus-
tries, investors narrow the number of possibilities to be considered.
One problem with relative strength is that a stock could show increasing rela-
tive strength because it is declining less quickly than the market, not because it
is increasing. This suggests that relative strength is not a technique to be used in
isolation.
Numerous investment services provide information on relative strength. For
example, The Value Line Investment Survey divides a stock’s price by the Value Line
Composite Average and plots this relative strength ratio for each company it cov-
ers. Relative strength analysis lends itself well to computerized stock analysis. This
probably accounts for its popularity among institutional investors who own highly
automated and sophisticated data analysis systems.
Using the Computer for Technical Analysis
Obviously, widespread computer use makes technical analysis much more accessible
than previously. The basic choice for those interested in technical analysis remains
either obtaining software or using an online service. Software-based programs are
more comprehensive, both with regard to charting and to technical indicators.
Software-based programs allow the user to select a trading system based on multi-
ple technical indicators and backtest the system to determine what the profitability
would have been. Few online services offer any type of trading system, and none
allow significant historical backtesting.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Relative Strength, Coca-Cola
Oct-16
Dec-16
Feb-17
Apr-17
Jun-17
Aug-17
Oct-17
Dec-17
Feb-18
Apr-18
Jun-18
Aug-18
Oct-18
FIGURE 16.8 Coca-Cola relative strength performance, 2016–2018
Technical Indicators 435
Using technical analysis systems requires both a program and a data vendor,
and costs can add up quickly. Data can be provided at the end of the day, intraday
delayed, or real time. Most users find web-based services sufficient.
Technical Indicators
The chart remains the technician’s most important tool for making buy and sell
decisions. However, in addition to looking at the plot of stock prices, technicians
also like to examine the overall situation by analyzing such factors as breadth and
market sentiment indicators.
Breadth Indicators
The advance–decline line (breadth of the market) The advance–decline line
measures, on a cumulative daily basis, the difference between the number of stocks
advancing in price and those declining for a group of stocks such as those on the
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). Subtracting the number of declines from the
number of advances produces the net advance for a given day.
The advance–decline line, often referred to as the breadth of the market,
results from plotting a running total of these numbers across time. The line can
be based on daily or weekly stock prices. The advance–decline line is compared
to a stock average, such as the DJIA, in order to analyze any divergence between
the two. Technicians believe that divergence can signal that the trend is about to
change.
The advance–decline line and the market averages normally move together.
If both are rising (declining), the overall market is said to be technically strong
(weak). If the advance–decline line is rising while the market average is declining,
the decline in the market average should reverse itself. Particular attention is paid
to a divergence between the two during a bull market. If the market rises while
the line weakens or declines, this indicates a weakening in the market; the market
would, therefore, be expected to start declining.
New highs and lows Part of the information reported for the NYSE and other
stocks is the 52-week high and low prices for each stock. Technicians regard the
market as bullish when a significant number of stocks hit 52-week highs. On the
other hand, technicians see rising market indexes and few stocks hitting new highs
as a troublesome sign.
Volume Volume is an accepted part of technical analysis. High trading volume,
other things being equal, is generally regarded as a bullish sign. Heavy volume com-
bined with rising prices is even more bullish.
Sentiment Indicators
Short-interest ratio The short interest for a security is the number of shares that
have been sold short and not yet bought back. The short-interest ratio can be
defined relative to shares outstanding or average daily volume, as in:
Short-interest ratio Total shares sold short/Average daily trading volume (16-1)
Advance–Decline
Line Relates the number
of stocks rising to the
number declining
Short Interest The total
number of shares in the
market sold short and not
yet repurchased
436 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
The NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq report the short interest monthly for each stock.
For investors interested in finding information about short interest, it is readily
available at websites such as finance.yahoo.com.9
The short-interest ratio indicates the number of days necessary to “work off” the
current short interest. For example, a ratio of 1.0 means that the outstanding short
interest approximates a day’s trading volume.
Investors sell short when they expect prices to decline; therefore, the higher the
short interest, the more investors are expecting a decline. A large short-interest
position for an individual stock should indicate strong negative sentiment against
a stock.
Many technical analysts interpret this ratio in the opposite manner, as a contrar-
ian indicator, that is, a high short-interest ratio is taken as a bullish sign because the
large number of shares sold short must be repurchased in order to close out the
short sales. The larger the short-interest ratio, the larger the potential demand that
is indicated. Therefore, an increase in the ratio indicates more “pent-up” demand
for the shares.
The short-interest ratio for a given month should be interpreted in relation to
historical boundaries, which historically were in the range of 1.0–2.0 for the NYSE.
The problem is that the boundaries keep changing. In the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s,
a ratio of 2.0 was bullish. Since the 1980s, the ratio has been in the 3.0–6.0 range
regardless of the market.
Short-interest figures can be distorted by hedging and arbitrage techniques that
have become more popular. For example, convertible arbitrage is a market-neutral
strategy that involves the simultaneous purchase of convertible bonds and the short
sale of the same firm’s common stock. Hedged short sellers are not likely to panic if
the stock price moves adversely (i.e., up), which otherwise might lead them to buy
and push the price up further.
Mutual fund liquidity Several indicators are based on the theory of contrary invest-
ing. The idea is to trade contrary to most investors, who supposedly almost always
miss turning points in price trends. This is an old idea on Wall Street, and over time,
technicians have developed several measures designed to capitalize on this concept.
As mentioned previously, short interest is often used as a contrarian indicator.
Mutual fund liquidity is often used as a contrary opinion technique. Under this
scenario, mutual funds are viewed in a manner similar to odd-lotters; that is, they
are presumed to act incorrectly before a market turning point.10 Therefore, when
mutual fund liquidity is low because the funds are fully invested, contrarians believe
that the market is at, or near, a peak. Conversely, when funds hold large liquid
reserves, it suggests that they are bearish. Contrarians consider this a good time to
buy because the market may be near its low point.
The opinions of investment advisory newsletters Investors Intelligence, an invest-
ment advisory service, samples weekly the opinions of about 150 investment advi-
sory services and calculates an index of investment service opinions. It has found
that, on average, these services are most bearish at the market bottom and least
438 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
4. Out-of-sample validity. Has the rule been tried on data other than that used to
produce the rule? It is always possible to find a rule that works on a particular
sample if enough rules are tried—that is, it is possible to torture the data until
it confesses.
A well-known test of technical trading rules is the filter rule test. A filter rule spec-
ifies a breakpoint for an individual stock or a market average, and trades are made
when the stock-price change is greater than this filter. For example, buy a stock if
the price moves up 10 percent from some established base, hold it until it declines
10 percent from its new high, and then sell it and possibly go short.
Several studies of filters have been conducted. Fama and Blume tested 24 filters
(ranging from 0.50 percent to 50 percent) on the 30 Dow Jones stocks.12 Before
commissions, several of the filters were profitable, in particular the smallest (0.5 per-
cent). After commissions, however, average returns were typically negative or very
small. Brokerage commissions more than offset any gains that could be exploited.
Many different variations of the relative strength technique can be tested by
varying the method used to calculate the average price and the stocks used in the
comparison. If we conduct enough tests, we can find a rule that produces favorable
results on a particular sample; however, before concluding that a trading rule is suc-
cessful, we must conduct a fair test. Risks must be comparable, and appropriate costs
must be deducted. Finally, the rule should be tried on a different sample of stocks.
The challenge of the efficient market hypothesis The EMH poses a major
challenge to the usefulness of technical analysis. Virtually, all statistical tests of the
EMH strongly support weak-form efficiency, thereby providing evidence against
technical analysis, which holds that stock-price changes across time are dependent
and that prices move in trends. Many tests of technical trading rules suggest that
such rules do not generate superior risk-adjusted returns after all relevant costs are
deducted. This evidence is why many informed observers doubt whether technical
analysis can really work on a consistent basis. Nevertheless, proponents of techni-
cal analysis claim that it can and does work, and certainly there is some supporting
evidence, which we now examine.
Evidence supporting technical analysis Many studies suggest that technical
analysis does not work, which is why most academics (and textbooks) speak unfa-
vorably about technical analysis. Nevertheless, some evidence exists that supports
technical analysis. The following articles appear in The Journal of Finance, one of the
top academic journals in the field.
Jegadeesh found predictable patterns in stock prices based on monthly returns
over a 50+ year period. 13 He showed that stocks with large losses in one month are
likely to show a significant reversal in the following month and that stocks with large
gains in one month are likely to show a significant loss the next month. Subsequent
research by Jegadeesh and Titman14 attributed the short-term reversal to micro-
structure issues, particularly bid/ask bounce, which suggests that in practice capital-
izing on the return pattern would be very difficult for investors.
Filter Rule A rule for
buying and selling stocks
according to the stock’s
price movements
12 Eugene Fama and Marshall Blume, “Filter Rules and Stock-Market Trading,” The Journal of Business: A
Supplement, 39 (January 1969): 2–21.
13 Narasimhan Jegadeesh, “Evidence of Predictable Behavior of Security Returns,” The Journal of Finance
(July 1990): 881–898.
14 Narasimhan Jegadeesh and Sheridan Titman, “Short-Horizon Return Reversal and the Bid-Ask Spread,”
Journal of Financial Intermediation, 4 (1995): 116–132.
Some Conclusions about Technical Analysis 439
Baron et al. support the usefulness of two basic technical indicators, moving aver-
ages and support and resistance. 15 The authors’ results suggest it pays to be in the
market when the DJIA is above its 200-day moving average and to be more cautious
when it is below that average. The authors conclude that the results are “consistent
with technical rules having predictive power.”
Chordia and Swaminathan found that trading volume is a significant determi-
nant of leads and lags observed in stock prices. 16 Returns on low-volume portfolios
respond more slowly to information in market returns than do returns on high-
volume portfolios.
Lo, Mamaysky, and Wang at MIT developed a systematic and automatic approach
to technical pattern recognition in order to bypass the subjective nature of technical
analysis.17 Testing a large number of stocks, they found that several technical indica-
tors provide incremental information and may have practical value.
The Ebb and Flow of Technical Analysis
There is a general ebb and flow in the popularity of alternative investment strate-
gies, with some strategies gaining followers, whereas other strategies are abandoned
by investors. In general, the same is true of technical analysis. The vast majority
of investment firms employ many more fundamental analysts than technical ana-
lysts; however, technical analysis has gained some credibility and popularity in the
past two decades. One reason for the growing popularity of technical analysis is the
advent of high-speed computing, which has made it easier to implement, less costly
to execute, and more accessible to investors. A second reason for its growth is the
increased interest and support for behavioral finance, which offers validation for
many of the technical trading rules.
Historically, many investors considered technical analysis to be a mutually exclu-
sive alternative to fundamental analysis. However, investors are increasingly recog-
nizing that fundamental analysis and technical analysis should not be viewed as
independent approaches. As one analyst puts it, “I choose stocks or sectors that
have strong fundamentals and then use technical analysis to help me decide when
to trade.”
Some Conclusions about Technical
Analysis
Technical analysis often appeals to those beginning a study of investments because
it seems reasonable that stock prices form repeatable patterns or that certain indica-
tors should be related to future stock price movements. Most people who look at a
chart of stock prices will immediately see what they believe to be patterns and clear
evidence of trends that should have been obvious to anyone.
15 William Baron, Josef Lakonishok, and Blake LeBaron, “Simple Technical Trading Rules and the Sto-
chastic Properties of Stock Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 47 (December 1992): 1731–1764.
16 Taran Chordia and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, “Trading Volume and Cross-Autocorrelation in Stock
Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 55 (April 2000): 913–935.
17 Andrew Lo, Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang, “Foundations of Technical Analysis: Computational
Algorithms, Statistical Inference, and Empirical Implementation,” The Journal of Finance, 55 (August
2000): 1705–1770.
440 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
Consider a quote from John Allen Paulos, a mathematician who wrote A Math-
ematician Plays the Stock Market18
:
“People tend not to believe that markets move in random ways. Randomness is difficult
to recognize. If you have people write down 100 Hs and Ts to simulate 100 flips of a
coin, you will always be able to tell a sequence generated by a human from one gener-
ated by real coin flips. When humans make up the sequence, they don’t put in enough
consecutive Hs and consecutive Ts, and they don’t make the lengths of these runs long
enough or frequent enough. And that is one of the reasons people look at patterns in
the stock market and ascribe significance to them.”
How should we view this situation? Academicians (and numerous practitioners)
are highly skeptical of technical analysis, to say the least. Most academic discussions
at the college level dismiss, or seriously disparage, technical analysis. A primary rea-
son is that thorough tests of technical analysis techniques typically fail to confirm
their value.
• Efficient market theories argue against the possibility of profiting from using
technical analysis.
In addition to these reasons, other troubling features of technical analysis remain.
First, several interpretations of each technical tool and chart pattern are not only
possible but typical. One or more of the interpreters will be correct, but it is virtually
impossible to know beforehand who they will be. After the fact, we will know which
indicator or chart, or whose interpretation, was correct, but only those investors who
used that particular information will benefit. Tools such as the Dow theory are well
known for their multiple interpretations by various observers who disagree over how
the theory is to be interpreted. These types of problems come under various labels
such as data snooping and ex post selection of trading rules and search methods.
Furthermore, consider a technical trading rule that is, in fact, successful. Assume
it correctly predicts movements in the market or some particular stock. Such a rule
or pattern, if observed by several market participants, will be self-destructive as more
and more investors use it. Price will reach its equilibrium value quickly, taking away
profit opportunities from all but the quickest. Some observers will start trading
before the rest on the basis of what they expect to happen. (For example, they may
act before a complete head and shoulders forms.) Price will then reach an equilib-
rium even more quickly, so that only those who act earliest will benefit. Eventually,
the value of any such rule will be negated entirely.
Strong evidence exists that stock-price changes are weak form efficient. If this is
the case, any patterns formed are accidental but not surprising.
Investments Intuition
No inherent reason exists for stock-price move-
ments to repeat themselves. For example, flipping
a fair coin 100 times should, on average, result
in about 50 heads and 50 tails. There is some
probability that the first 10 tosses could produce
10 heads. However, the chance of such a pattern
repeating itself is very small.
Summary 441
Yet, it is impossible to test all the techniques of technical analysis and their varia-
tions and interpretations. In fact, technical analysis has not been tested thoroughly.
The techniques are simply too numerous, and technical analysis is broader than the
use of only simple trading rules. Therefore, absolutely definitive statements about
the merits of technical analysis cannot be made. A good example of the omissions
in this area is the use of volume in technical strategies. Although volume is a recog-
nized part of technical analysis, relatively few tests have evaluated its use in conjunc-
tion with the rest of technical analysis.
Also, as noted previously, some evidence tends to support the basis of technical
analysis. Furthermore, today’s behavioral models open up the possibility of profit-
able trading strategies using technical analysis because of noise in the markets or
irrational behavior on the part of investors.
What can we conclude about technical analysis? On the basis of all available evi-
dence, it is difficult to justify technical analysis. EMH studies imply that technical
analysis does not work on a consistent, after-transactions-cost basis. Regardless of
the evidence, however, technical analysis remains popular with many investors.
Perhaps a recent quote from the popular press summarizes it best:
Whether it works or not, technical analysis is no quick road to riches. Even die-
hard technical analysts say that the method works best when accompanied by funda-
mental research—for example, to time entry and exit points for a stock.19
Summary
• Technical analysis is the oldest and most controversial approach used by inves-
tors to make trade decisions.
• Technical analysis relies on market data, primarily price and volume data, to pre-
dict the direction of individual stocks or the market as a whole. The emphasis is
on internal factors that help to detect demand–supply conditions in the market.
• The rationale for technical analysis is that net demand for stocks can be
detected by various technical indicators and that trends in stock prices occur
and continue for considerable periods of time. Stock prices require time to
adjust to the change in supply and demand.
• Technical analysis involves the use of charts of price patterns to detect trends
that are believed to persist.
• Aggregate market analysis originated with the Dow theory, the best-known
technical theory. It is designed to detect the start of major movements.
• The most frequently used types of charts are: line, bar, candlestick, and point-
and- figure.
• Numerous chart “patterns” are recognizable to a technician. However, all pat-
terns are subject to multiple interpretations because different technicians will
read the same chart differently.
• A very well-known tool of technical analysis is the moving average, which is
used to detect both the direction and the rate of change in prices.
• Another well-known technique for individual stocks is relative strength, which
shows the strength of a particular stock in relation to its average price, its
industry, or the market.
• Technical indicators of the aggregate market include the following:
1. The advance–decline line (breadth of market), which reflects the condi-
tion of the overall market.
19 See Hirson, op. cit., p. 98.
442 Chapter 16 Technical Analysis
2. Mutual fund liquidity, which uses the potential buying power (liquidity) of
mutual funds as a bullish or bearish indicator.
3. Short-interest ratio, which assesses potential demand from investors who
have sold short.
4. Contrary opinion, which is designed to go against the crowd, includes the
put/call ratio and the opinions of investment advisory services. The short
sale ratio and mutual fund liquidity can also be interpreted as contrarian
indicators.
