24CHAPTER 2
Continuing our scenario from
Chapter 1 wherein you inherit
$1 million dollars from a relative,
with the stipulation that you must
invest it under the general supervi-
sion of a trustee, let’s consider your
investing opportunities. You know
generally about stocks and bonds,
but you are not really sure about
the specific details of each. For
example, you do not know what a
BBB rating on a bond indicates.
Furthermore, you are unaware
of zero-coupon bonds, you have
never heard the term securitiza-
tion, and when your broker sug-
gests that you consider American
Depository Receipts (ADRs) for
international exposure, you are
really at a loss. For sure, you are
not ready to explain to your trustee
why you might consider derivative
securities for your portfolio. It is
clear that today’s investors should be prepared to deal with such issues because they
will arise as soon as you undertake any type of investing program.
Fortunately, you can learn to evaluate your investing opportunities, both current
and prospective, by learning the basics about some of the fundamental types of
securities.
This chapter explains the most important investment alternatives available to
investors, ranging from money market securities to capital market securities to
derivative securities. The emphasis is on the basic features of these securities, pro-
viding the reader with the knowledge needed to understand the investment oppor-
tunities of interest to most investors. We also consider financial market innovations
such as securitization.
Changes in the securities field occur so rapidly that investors are regularly con-
fronted with new developments. Investors in the 21st century have a wide variety of
investment alternatives available, and it is reasonable to expect that this variety will
continue to increase. The types of securities are only constrained by the ingenuity
Investment Alternatives
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Identify money market and capital
market securities and understand
the important features of these
securities.
• Price a T-bill and calculate the
bond equivalent yield and effec-
tive annual yield on money market
instruments.
• Recognize important terms such as
asset-backed securities, stock splits,
bond ratings, private equity, and
ADRs.
• Understand the basics of two
derivative securities, options and
futures, and how they fit into the
investor’s choice set.
Organizing Financial Assets 25
of investment bankers, and they are an imaginative group. However, if investors
understand the basic characteristics of the major existing securities, they will likely
be able to understand new securities as they appear.
Organizing Financial Assets
The emphasis in this chapter (and in the text in general) is on financial assets, which
are financial claims on the issuers of the securities. These claims are marketable secu-
rities that are saleable in the various marketplaces discussed in Chapter 4.
Basically, households have three choices with regard to savings options:
1. Hold the liabilities of traditional intermediaries, such as banks, thrifts (sav-
ings and loans, savings banks and credit unions), and insurance companies.
This means holding savings accounts and other financial assets well known to
many individual investors.
2. Hold securities directly, such as stocks and bonds, purchased through brokers
and other intermediaries. This option can also include self-directed retire-
ment plans involving IRAs, 401(k)s, Keoghs, and so forth.
3. Hold securities indirectly, through mutual funds, exchange-traded funds
(ETFs), and pension funds. In this case, households leave the investing deci-
sions to others by investing indirectly rather than directly.
A pronounced shift has occurred in these alternatives over time. Households
have decreased their allocation to direct holdings of securities and the liabilities
of traditional intermediaries and have increased their indirect holdings of assets
through mutual funds, ETFs, and pension funds. Indirect investing, discussed in
Chapter 3, refers to investors owning securities indirectly through investment com-
panies such as mutual funds and ETFs. This method of investing has become tre-
mendously popular in the last few years with individual investors. For example, the
assets of mutual funds, the most popular type of investment company, as of year-end
2017, totaled approximately $19 trillion.
Households also own a large, and growing, amount of pension fund reserves.
Most of this amount is being invested by pension funds, on behalf of households, in
equity and fixed-income securities, the primary securities of interest to most indi-
vidual investors. Pension funds (both public and private) are the largest single insti-
tutional owner of common stocks.
Direct Investing
This chapter concentrates on investment alternatives available through direct invest-
ing, which involves securities that investors not only buy and sell themselves but
also have direct control over. Investors who invest directly in financial markets,
either using a broker or by other means, have a wide variety of assets from which
to choose.
Nonmarketable investment opportunities, such as savings accounts at thrift insti-
tutions, are discussed briefly since investors often own these assets and are familiar
with them. However, our emphasis is on marketable securities, which can be clas-
sified into one of three categories: the money market, the capital market, and the
derivatives market.
26 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
Investors should understand money market securities, but they typically will not
own these securities directly, choosing instead to own them through money market
mutual funds. Within the capital market, securities can be classified as either fixed-
income (debt) or equity securities. Finally, investors may choose to include deriva-
tive securities in their portfolios. The market value of these securities is derived
from an underlying security such as common stock.
Exhibit 2.1 organizes the types of financial assets to be analyzed in this chap-
ter and in Chapter 3 using the above classifications. Although for expositional
purposes we cover direct investing and indirect investing in separate chapters,
it is important to understand that investors can invest directly through the use
of a brokerage account and invest indirectly in one or more types of investment
company. Furthermore, brokerage accounts can accommodate the ownership of
investment company shares, thereby combining direct and indirect investing into
one account.
• Today’s investors often engage in both direct and indirect investing in their
portfolios. Brokerage accounts can accommodate both.
EXHIBIT 2.1 | Major types of financial assets
Nonmarketable
DIRECT INVESTING
• Savings deposits
• Certificates of deposit
• Money market deposit accounts
• U.S. savings bonds
Money market • Treasury bills
• Negotiable certificates of deposit
• Commercial paper
• Eurodollars
• Repurchase agreements
• Banker’s acceptances
Capital market • Fixed income
Treasuries
Agencies
Municipals
Corporates
• Equities
Preferred stock
Common stock
Derivatives market • Options
• Futures contracts
Investment companies
INDIRECT INVESTING
• Unit investment trust
• Open end
Money market mutual fund
Stock, bond, and income funds
• Closed end
• Exchange-traded funds (ETFs)
Nonmarketable Financial Assets 27
A Global Perspective
As noted in Chapter 1, investors should adopt a global perspective in making their
investment decisions. Many of the investment alternatives analyzed in this chapter
are readily available from foreign markets to U.S. investors. Thus, the characteris-
tics of these basic securities are relevant whether investors own domestic or foreign
securities, or both. Furthermore, investors must recognize that securities tradition-
ally thought of as U.S. securities are, in reality, heavily influenced by global events.
To illustrate, in 2018, Apple had revenue of $265.6 billion, with 63 percent coming
from foreign markets; nearly 20 percent came from China alone. Clearly, Apple is
heavily influenced by global events.
U.S. investors can choose to purchase foreign stocks directly. Alternatively,
many U.S. investors invest internationally by turning funds over to an invest-
ment company, which makes decisions on behalf of investors. 1 Regardless,
investors must understand we live in a global environment that will profoundly
change the way we live and invest. The simple fact is that while the United States
is, and will continue to be, a major player in the financial markets, it no longer
dominates.
Nonmarketable Financial Assets
We begin our discussion of investment alternatives with those that are nonmarket-
able simply because most individuals will own one or more of these assets. For exam-
ple, approximately 12 percent of total financial assets of U.S. households are in the
form of deposits, including checkable deposits and currency, and time and savings
deposits. Furthermore, these assets serve as a good contrast to the marketable secu-
rities we will concentrate on throughout the text.
A distinguishing characteristic of nonmarketable assets is that they represent per-
sonal transactions between the owner and the issuer. That is, you as the owner of a
savings account at a credit union must open the account personally, and you must
deal with the credit union in maintaining the account. In contrast, marketable secu-
rities trade in impersonal markets—the buyer (seller) does not know who the seller
(buyer) is, and does not care.
Typically nonmarketable assets are “safe” investments, occurring at insured
financial institutions or, issued by the U.S. government. At least some of these
assets offer the ultimate in liquidity, where liquidity is defined as the ease with
which an asset can be converted into cash. For example, we know we can withdraw
our money from a savings account, or a money market deposit account (MMDA),
very quickly.
Exhibit 2.2 describes the four major nonmarketable assets held by investors. Inno-
vations have occurred in this area. For example, the Treasury now offers I bonds, or
inflation-indexed savings bonds. The yield on these bonds is a combination of a
fixed rate of return and a semiannual inflation rate.2
EXHIBIT 2.2 | Important Nonmarketable Financial Assets
1. Savings accounts. Undoubtedly the best-known type
of investment in the United States, savings accounts
are held at commercial banks or at “thrift” institu-
tions such as savings and loan associations and credit
unions. Savings accounts in insured institutions offer
a high degree of safety on both the principal and
the interest earned on that principal. Liquidity is
taken for granted and, together with the safety fea-
ture, probably accounts for the popularity of savings
accounts. Most accounts permit unlimited access to
funds although some restrictions can apply.
2. Nonnegotiable certificates of deposit. Commercial
banks and other institutions offer a variety of savings
certificates known as certificates of deposit (CDs).
These certificates are available for a variety of
amounts and maturities, with higher rates offered as
maturity increases. Nonnegotiable CDs are meant to
be a buy-and-hold investment, and penalties for early
withdrawal are commonly imposed.
3. MMDAs. Financial institutions offer MMDAs with
no interest rate ceilings. Money market “investment”
accounts have a required minimum deposit to open,
pay competitive money market rates, and are insured
up to $250,000 by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC), if the bank is insured. Six pre-
authorized or automatic transfers are allowed each
month, up to three of which can be by check. There
is no limit on the number of deposits or withdrawals
that can be made in person or through automated
teller machines (ATMs).
4. U.S. government savings bonds. U.S. savings bonds
are nonmarketable, nontransferable, and nonnego-
tiable and cannot be used for collateral. They are
purchased from the Treasury, most often through
banks and savings institutions. Series EE bonds
in paper form are sold at 50 percent of face value,
with denominations of as low as $50 and as high as
$10,000. Electronic EE bonds are sold at face value
and earn a fixed rate of return.
A second series of savings bonds is the I bond, sold
in both electronic and paper form. A comparison of
these two savings bonds is available at http://www.
savingsbonds.gov/indiv/research/indepth/ebonds/
res_e_bonds_eecomparison.htm.
Coca-Cola is justifiably famous for its brand name and its
global marketing efforts. Its success, however, is heavily
dependent on what happens in the non-U.S. markets it has increasingly
penetrated. Nearly 60 percent of Coke’s revenues are generated internationally.
If foreign economies slow, Coke’s sales will be hurt. Furthermore, Coke must
be able to convert its foreign earnings into dollars at favorable rates and
repatriate them. Therefore, investing in Coke involves betting on a variety of
global events
28 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
Money Market Securities
Money markets include short-term, highly liquid, relatively low-risk debt instru-
ments sold by governments, financial institutions, and corporations to investors.
This market is dominated by financial institutions, particularly banks, and govern-
ments. The size of the transactions in the money market typically is large ($100,000
or more). The maturities of money market instruments range from 1 day to 1 year
and are often less than 90 days.
Some of these instruments are negotiable and actively traded, and some are not.
Investors may choose to invest directly in some of these securities, but more often
they do so indirectly through money market mutual funds (discussed in Chapter 3)
Money Market Securities 29
which are investment companies organized to own and manage a portfolio of secu-
rities. Many individual investors own shares in money market funds that, in turn,
own portfolios of these money market securities. Exhibit 2.3 describes the major
money market securities.3
The Treasury Bill
The Treasury bill (T-bill) is the most prominent money market security because it
is the safest asset available and because it serves as a benchmark asset. Although in
some pure sense there is no such thing as a risk-free financial asset, on a practical
basis the T-bill is risk-free on a nominal basis (ignoring inflation). There is little
practical risk of default by the U.S. government, despite the debt ceiling “crisis” in
the summer of 2011 and the fall of 2013.
Treasury Bill A short-term
money market instrument
sold at discount by the
U.S. government
EXHIBIT 2.3 | Important Money Market Securities
1. Treasury bills. The premier money market instru-
ment, a fully guaranteed, very liquid IOU from the
U.S. Treasury. They are sold on an auction basis every
week at a discount from face value in denominations
starting at $10,000. The greater the discount at time
of purchase, the higher the return earned by inves-
tors. Typical maturities are 13 and 26 weeks, although
maturities range from a few days to 52 weeks. New
bills can be purchased by investors on a competi-
tive or noncompetitive bid basis. Outstanding (i.e.,
already issued) bills can be purchased and sold in
the secondary market, an extremely efficient market
where government securities dealers stand ready to
buy and sell these securities.
2. Negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs). Issued by a bank
in exchange for a deposit of funds, a CD is a liability
of the issuer. The deposit is maintained in the bank
until maturity, at which time the holder receives the
deposit plus interest. However, these CDs are nego-
tiable, meaning that they can be sold in the open
market before maturity. Dealers make a market in
these unmatured CDs. Maturities typically range
from 14 days (the minimum maturity permitted) to
one year. The minimum deposit is $100,000.
3. Commercial paper. A short-term, unsecured promis-
sory note issued by large, well-known, and financially
strong corporations (including finance companies).
Denominations start at $100,000, with a maturity of
270 days or less (average maturity is about 30 days).
Commercial paper is usually sold at a discount either
directly by the issuer or indirectly through a dealer.
Although a secondary market exists for commercial
paper, it is weak and most paper is held to maturity.
Commercial paper is rated by a rating service as to
quality (relative probability of issuer default).
4. Repurchase agreement (RP). An agreement between a
borrower and a lender (typically institutions) to sell
and repurchase U.S. government securities. The bor-
rower initiates an RP by contracting to sell securities to
a lender and agreeing to repurchase these securities
at a prespecified price on a stated date. The effective
interest rate is given by the difference between the
two prices. The maturity of RPs is generally very short,
from three to 14 days, and sometimes overnight. The
minimum denomination is typically $100,000.
5. Banker’s acceptance. A time draft drawn on a bank
by a customer, whereby the bank agrees to pay a
particular amount at a specified future date. Bank-
er’s acceptances are negotiable instruments because
the holder can sell them for less than face value
(i.e., discount them) in the money market. They
are normally used in international trade. Banker’s
acceptances are traded on a discount basis, with a
minimum denomination of $100,000. Maturities typ-
ically range from 30 to 180 days, with 90 days being
the most common.
 Investment Alternatives
T-bills are redeemed at face value, thereby providing investors with an
effective rate of return that can be calculated at time of purchase. Obviously,
the less investors pay for these securities, the larger their return. T-bill rates
are determined at auction each week and therefore reflect current money
market conditions. If T-bill rates are rising (falling), this generally reflects
an increased (decreased) demand for funds. In turn, other interest rates will
be affected.
Money market securities, such as T-bills and commercial paper, are priced based
on a discount from face value. Dealers quote the discount, which is then converted
to a price by the investor. The discount is often referenced as the bank discount
rate. Equation 2-1 shows the formula used to convert a quoted bank discount rate
to a price.
Price P F x r x n
BD( ) 1 360 (2-1)
where: F = face value of T-bill; rBD = bank discount rate; and n = days to maturity
There are two return measures that investors commonly reference when discuss-
ing money market securities: the bond equivalent yield (rBEY
) and the equivalent
annual yield (rEAY
). These two returns will always exceed the bank discount rate,
which is a biased indicator of an investor’s actual return. The formulas to derive rBEY
and rEAY are presented as Equations 2-2 and 2-3, respectively.
r F P
P x n
BEY
365 (2-2)
r F P
P
EAY
n
1 1
365
(2-3)
Money Market Rates
The rates on money market securities tend to move together, and most rates are
very similar to each other for the same maturity instrument. Treasury bill rates are
less than the rates available on other money market securities because of the pre-
sumed risk-free nature of T-bills.
For a $10,000 T-bill with 140 days to maturity, a security
dealer quotes a bank discount rate of 2.15 percent. To
purchase the T-bill, an investor would pay:
P 10 000 1 0 0215 140 360 9 916 39, [ . ] $ , ./
The T-bill offers a bond equivalent yield of:
rBEY [ ]( , , . ) , . . %10 000 9 916 39 9 916 39 365 140 2 198/ /
The T-bill offers an equivalent annual yield of:
rEAY [ ( , , . ) , . ] . %/
1 10 000 9 916 39 9 916 39 1 2 213365 140
/
Some Practical Advice
Most investors will never own a money market
security directly because of the unfamiliarity
and the large face value of these instruments.
However, most investors will own them indirectly
sometime in their investing lifetime in the form of
money market mutual funds. By buying shares
in this type of fund, an investor gets the benefits
of these securities without having to worry about
the details and the large face value.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Why are money market securities referred to as impersonal assets, while the
nonmarketable financial assets are not?
2. Holding maturity constant, “how similar would” you expect the yields on
money market securities to be?
3. Why does the Treasury bill serve as a benchmark security?
Capital Market Securities
Capital market instruments encompass fixed-income and equity securities with
maturities greater than one year. Risk is generally much higher than in the money
market because of the longer time to maturity and the very nature of the securities
sold in the capital markets. Marketability is poorer in some cases.
• The capital market includes both debt and equity securities, with equity securi-
ties having no maturity date.
Fixed-Income Securities
We begin our review of capital market securities typically owned directly by individ-
ual investors with fixed-income securities. These securities have a specified payment
schedule with the amount and date of each payment generally known in advance.
Some of these securities deviate from the traditional bond format, but all fixed-
income securities have a specified payment or repayment schedule—they must
mature at some future date.
Technically, fixed-income securities include Treasury bonds, agency bonds,
municipal bonds, corporate bonds, asset-backed securities, mortgage-related bonds,
and money market securities, which were covered in the previous section.
Bonds
Bonds can be described simply as long-term debt instruments representing the issu-
er’s contractual obligation, or IOU.4
Bonds are fixed-income securities because the interest payments and the principal
repayment for a typical bond are specified at the time the bond is issued and fixed
Capital Markets The
market for long-term
securities such as bonds
and stocks
Fixed-Income Securities
Securities with speci-
fied payment dates and
amounts, includes primar-
ily bonds
Bonds Long-term debt
instruments representing
the issuer’s contractual
obligation
Some Practical Advice
Most investors will never own a money market
security directly because of the unfamiliarity
and the large face value of these instruments.
However, most investors will own them indirectly
sometime in their investing lifetime in the form of
money market mutual funds. By buying shares
in this type of fund, an investor gets the benefits
of these securities without having to worry about
the details and the large face value.
4 The buyer of a newly issued coupon bond is lending money to the issuer who, in turn, agrees to pay
interest on this loan and repay the principal at a stated maturity date.
32 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
for the life of the bond. At the time of purchase, the bond buyer knows the future
stream of cash flows he or she expects to receive from buying and holding the bond
to maturity. Barring default by the issuer, these payments will be received at speci-
fied intervals until maturity, at which time the principal will be repaid. However, if
the buyer decides to sell the bond before maturity, the price received will depend
on the level of interest rates at that time.
• From an investor’s viewpoint, bonds are typically “safe” assets, at least relative
to stocks and derivative securities. Principal and interest are specified, and the
issuer must meet these obligations or face default, and possibly bankruptcy.5
Bond characteristics The par value (face value) of most bonds is $1,000, and
we will use this number as the amount to be repaid at maturity. 6 The typical bond
matures (terminates) on a specified date and is technically known as a term bond.7
Most bonds are coupon bonds, where coupon refers to the periodic interest that
the issuer pays to the holder of the bonds.8 Interest on bonds is typically paid
semiannually.
Bond prices By convention, bond traders use 100 as par rather than $1,000, which
is the actual par value of most bonds. Therefore, a price of 90 represents $900 (90
percent of the $1,000 par value), and a price of 55 represents $550 using the normal
assumption of a par value of $1,000. The easiest way to convert quoted bond prices
into actual prices is to remember that they are quoted in percentages, with the com-
mon assumption of a $1,000 par value.
• Bond prices are quoted as a percentage of par value, which is typically $1,000.
Accrued interest Example 2.4 suggests that an investor could purchase the IBM
bond for $1,013.75 on that day. Actually, bonds trade on an accrued interest basis.
That is, the bond buyer must pay the bond seller the price of the bond as well as
Par Value (Face
Value) The redemption
value of a bond paid at
maturity, typically $1,000
A 10-year, 10 percent coupon bond has a dollar coupon
of $100 (10 percent of $1,000); therefore, knowing
the percentage coupon rate is the same as knowing the coupon payment
in dollars.9 This bond would pay interest of $50 ($100 ÷ 2) on a specified
date every six months. The $1,000 principal would be repaid 10 years hence.
Similarly, a 5.5 percent coupon bond pays an annual interest amount of $55,
payable at $27.50 every six months. Note that all the characteristics of a bond
are specified when the bond is issued.
Fixed-Income Securities 33
the interest that has been earned (accrued) on the bond since the last semiannual
interest payment. This allows an investor to sell a bond any time between interest
payments without losing the interest that has accrued. Bond buyers should remem-
ber this additional “cost” when buying a bond because prices are quoted to investors
without the accrued interest.10
Discounts and premiums The price of the IBM bond in Example 2.4 is above
100 (i.e., $1,000) because market yields on bonds of this type declined after this
bond was issued.
The coupon on the IBM bond became more favorable than the going market
interest rate for comparable newly issued bonds, and the price increased to reflect
this fact. At any point in time some bonds sell at premiums (prices above par value),
reflecting a decline in market rates after that particular bond was sold. Others sell at
discounts (prices below $1,000) because the stated coupons are less than the prevail-
ing interest rate on comparable new issues.
• While a bond will be worth exactly its face value (typically $1,000) on
the day it matures, its price will fluctuate around $1,000 until then,
depending on what interest rates do. Interest rates and bond prices move
inversely. When rates fall, bond prices rise. Conversely, when rates rise,
bond prices fall.
Callable bonds The call provision gives the issuer the right to “call in” the bonds,
thereby depriving investors of that particular fixed-income security.11 Exercising the
call provision becomes attractive to the issuer when market interest rates drop suf-
ficiently below the bond’s coupon rate.12 The issuer expects to sell new bonds at a
lower interest cost, thereby replacing existing higher interest-cost bonds with new,
lower interest-cost bonds. Costs are incurred to call the bonds, such as a “call pre-
mium” and administrative expenses. 13
Some bonds, including most Treasury bonds, are not callable. On the other
hand, most municipal bonds are callable.
Call Provision Gives the
issuer the right to call in
a security and retire it by
paying off the obligation
A closing price of 101.375 on a particular day for an IBM
bond represents 101.375 percent of $1,000, or 1.01375 ×
$1,000 = $1,013.75. Treasury bond prices are quoted in 32nds and may be
shown as fractions, as in 100 14/32.
34 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
The Zero-coupon bond A radical innovation in the format of traditional bonds is
the Zero-Coupon Bond, which is issued with no interest to be paid during the life of
the bond. The purchaser pays less than par value for zero coupons and receives par
value at maturity. The difference in these two amounts generates an effective inter-
est rate or rate of return. As with Treasury bills, which are also sold at a discount, the
lower the price paid for the bond, the higher the effective return.
Issuers of zero-coupon bonds include corporations, municipalities, government
agencies, and the U.S. Treasury. Since 1985, the Treasury has offered STRIPS, or
Separate Trading of Registered Interest and Principal of Securities.15
Types of Bonds
There are four major types of bonds in the United States based on the issuer involved
(U.S. government, federal agency, municipality, and corporation), and variations
exist within each major type.
Treasury
securities
Federal
agen
Fixed-Income Securities 35
Treasury securities The U.S. government, in the course of financing its opera-
tions through the Treasury Department, issues numerous notes and bonds with
maturities greater than one year. The U.S. government is considered the safest
credit risk because of the overall stability and economic power of the U.S. economy
and because of the government’s power to print money.
• For practical purposes, investors do not consider the possibility of risk of
default for U.S. Treasury securities.
Treasury bonds have been rated since 1917, and always received a triple-A rating
until 2011, when Standard & Poor’s (S&P) lowered the rating one notch in a con-
troversial move. The other two rating agencies did not follow suit, although Fitch
credit rating service put the United States on a negative credit rating watch because
of the government failure to raise the debt ceiling in a timely manner.
Most investors still consider U.S. Treasury securities the safest securities in the
world. Investors purchase these securities with the expectation of earning a steady
stream of interest payments and with full assurance of receiving the par value of the
bonds when they mature. This was made clear following the unprecedented rating
cut by S&P. Long-term Treasury returns for 2011 were at near record lows due to
investor worries about the European debt crisis, and the slow economic growth in
the United States indicated no inflationary pressures. During turbulent times, inves-
tors often become more concerned about protecting themselves from loss rather
than making money. Thus, there is a “flight to quality,” which entails investors sell-
ing more risky securities and buying less risky securities. This drives up the prices of
the lower-risk securities, particularly U.S. Treasury securities. This is why the prices
of U.S. Treasury securities actually rose despite the downgrade of U.S. debt by S&P.
Treasury bonds and notes The U.S. government traditionally has issued Treas-
ury bonds with maturities of 10 to 30 years, although a bond can be issued with any
maturity exceeding 10 years. The Treasury also sells Treasury notes, issued for terms
of 2, 5, or 10 years.16 Interest on notes and bonds is paid every six months. Notes and
bonds differ only in original maturity and are therefore very similar securities. Thus,
it is common to use the terms “note” and “bond” interchangeably when making
general reference to fixed-income debt securities. In addition to their low risk, an
added benefit of all Treasury securities, notes, bonds, and bills is that their interest
is exempt from state and local taxes, which is a major benefit in some high-tax states.
TIPS Since 1997, the Treasury has sold Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities
(TIPS) which protect investors against losses resulting from inflation. TIPS pay
interest at a fixed rate twice a year, but this rate is applied to the inflation-adjusted
principal. Because the rate is applied to the adjusted principal, interest payments
can vary in amount from one period to the next. If inflation occurs, the interest pay-
ment increases. In the event of deflation, the interest payment decreases.
TIPS are sold at auction by the Treasury, with the interest rate determined at the
auction. Therefore, at the time you buy a new TIPS, you do not know what the inter-
est rate will be.17 They can be held to maturity or sold prior to maturity. At maturity,
the investor receives the higher of the adjusted principal or the original principal
(with deflation, the adjusted principal could be less than face value).
Taxes must be paid each year on both the interest and the inflation adjustments,
although the actual cash for the latter is not received until maturity. This is often
referred to as a phantom tax—the investor owes tax each year on the increased
value of the principal but does not receive this money until the bond is sold or
matures. Therefore, many investors prefer to hold these securities in a tax-deferred
retirement account.
Government Agency Securities Starting in the 1920s, the federal government
created various federal agencies designed to help certain sectors of the economy,
through either direct loans or guarantee of private loans. These credit agencies
compete for funds in the marketplace by selling government agency securities.
Two types of government agencies have existed in the U.S. financial system: fed-
eral agencies and Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs).
1. Federal agencies are part of the federal government, and their securities are
fully guaranteed by the Treasury. The most important “agency” for investors is
the Government National Mortgage Association (often referred to as “Ginnie
Mae”). Ginnie Mae securities are the only mortgage-backed securities that are
backed by the “full faith and credit” of the U.S. government.
2. GSEs are publicly held, for-profit corporations created by Congress. GSEs sell
their own securities in the marketplace in order to raise funds for their spe-
cific purposes. Although these agencies have access to credit lines from the
government, their securities are not explicitly guaranteed by the government
as to principal or interest. GSEs include the Federal Home Loan Bank and
the Farm Credit System.18
The Federal National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) and the Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“Freddie Mac”) started as federal agencies and
later offered stock to the public, becoming GSEs. 19 They buy mortgages from finan-
cial institutions, freeing them to make more mortgage loans to Americans. Because
of their Congressional charters, the financial markets believed that the government
would not allow these GSEs to default. In September 2008, a Federal takeover of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac occurred.
Mortgage-backed securities A part of the market of fixed-income securities
is known as asset-backed securities, which includes Mortgage-Backed Securities
Government Agency
Securities Securities
issued by federal agencies
(fully guaranteed) or by
government-sponsored
agencies (not guaranteed)
Some Practical Advice
An investor can buy or sell Treasury securities
through a financial institution, bank, or broker.
Alternatively, for a nominal fee and some simple
paperwork, investors can join TreasuryDirect. This
program allows investors to trade Treasury secu-
rities directly via the Internet. Participants put in
a “noncompetitive” bid, which means they pay
the average successful bid of the professionals.
Payments are deducted directly from the inves-
tor’s account.
Fixed-Income Securities 37
(MBSs). These securities are simply shares of home loans (mortgages) sold to inves-
tors in various security forms. Traditionally, investors in mortgage-backed securi-
ties expected to minimize default risk because most mortgages were guaranteed
by one of the government agencies. Nevertheless, these securities present investors
with uncertainty because they can receive varying amounts of monthly payments
depending on how quickly homeowners pay off their mortgages.
By now, almost everyone is familiar with the difficulties associated with subprime
mortgages and mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) and the role they played in the
financial crisis that began in 2007. In mid-2007, a pair of hedge funds managed by
Bear Stearns collapsed because of heavy losses in subprime mortgages. By 2008, a large
amount of home loans had been packaged and sold to investors, repackaged and sold
again, and so on. As good borrowers dwindled in number, the loan originators made
more and more loans to less creditworthy borrowers. Sometime in 2008, the rate of
house foreclosures started to increase sharply as many borrowers could no longer
keep current with their mortgage payments. With MBSs widely held throughout the
economy, the foreclosures and declining house prices led to larger and larger losses
for many individual investors, investment banks, and other financial institutions.
Municipal securities Bonds sold by states, counties, cities, and other political
entities (e.g., airport authorities and school districts) other than the federal govern-
ment and its agencies are called municipal bonds or munis (pronounced myōō’nēz).
This is a vast market, roughly $3.9 trillion as of 2017, with tens of thousands of differ-
ent issuers and more than 1 million different issues outstanding. According to the
Investment Company Institute, individual investors are the largest holders of munic-
ipal bonds as they hold 35 percent of all municipal bonds directly and another 36
percent indirectly through mutual funds, closed-end funds, and ETFs.
While we typically think of long-term bonds as having maximum maturities of
about 30 years, exceptions do occur. In late 2011, the California Institute of Tech-
nology (Caltech) sold $350 million of debt maturing in 100 years. These bonds,
rated AA1, were sold at a record low yield of 4.744 percent, which was 1.8 percent-
age points higher than 30-year Treasuries.
Credit ratings and marketability on munis range from very good to very suspect.
Overall, however, the historical default rate on municipal bonds has been very
favorable, and muni returns compare favorably with the investment-grade corpo-
rate market. In fact, for the 10-year period ending in 2013, an index of municipal
bonds has nearly the same return as an index of high-grade corporate bonds. This
is in spite of the fact that munis are tax exempt, while corporate bonds are taxable.
The relatively low-risk nature of munis may change, however, in this new era of defi-
cits for many municipal bond issuers. The perilous fiscal situations of municipalities
are often the result of generous postretirement benefits promised to workers cou-
pled with the political inability to raise revenues through increased taxation. The
dire situation of many municipalities—notably Detroit and Puerto Rico—has been
the subject of headlines in the popular press, serving to scare many investors away
from municipal bonds.
Two basic types of municipals are general obligation bonds, which are backed
by the “full faith and credit” of the issuer, and revenue bonds, which are repaid
from the revenues generated by the project they were sold to finance (e.g., a
toll road or airport improvement). 20 In the case of general obligation bonds, the
issuer can tax residents to pay for the bond interest and principal. In the case of
revenue bonds, the specific project must generate sufficient revenue to service
the issue.
It is common for long-term municipals to be sold as serial bonds, which means that
a specified portion of the original issue matures in specified years until the final
maturity date. For example, a 10-year serial issue might have 10 percent of the issue
maturing each year for the next 10 years. Structuring the bonds in this way allows
the municipality to gradually retire the debt over time, making the bonds safer for
investors.
Most municipals are insured by one of the major municipal bond insurers.
The insurance guarantees the payment of principal and interest should the issuer
default. By having the bonds insured, the issuers achieve a higher rating for the
bond and therefore a lower interest cost. Investors trade some yield for protection.
However, the financial viability of the bond insurers themselves came under scrutiny
in 2008 as the subprime crisis deepened. Prior to the subprime crisis, there were
several municipal bond insurers rated triple-A by the major credit rating agencies.
In 2014, none of the insurers were triple-A rated.
The taxable equivalent yield (TEY) The distinguishing feature of most munici-
pals is their exemption from federal taxes. Because of this feature, the stated inter-
est rate on munis is lower than that on comparable nonexempt bonds. The higher
an investor’s tax bracket, the more attractive municipals become.
• The taxable equivalent yield (TEY) shows the interest rate that a taxable bond
would have to pay an investor to make the bond equivalent on an after-tax
basis to the muni.
The TEY for any municipal bond and any marginal tax bracket can be calculated
using the following formula:
Taxable equivalent yield Municipal bond yield
marginal ta1 xx rate (2-4)
In many cases, the municipal bondholder can also avoid state and/or local taxes.
For example, a North Carolina resident purchasing a bond issued by the state of
North Carolina would escape all taxes on the interest received. 21 States often exempt
21 To calculate the TEY in these cases, first determine the effective state rate:
effective state rate = marginal state tax rate × (1 − federal marginal rate)
Then, calculate the combined effective federal/state tax rate as:
combined effective tax rate = effective state rate + federal rate
Use Equation 2-4 to calculate the combined TEY, substitute the combined effective tax rate for the
marginal tax rate.
Some Practical Advice
A free online municipal bond information service
is available, Electronic Municipal Market Access,
nicknamed EMMA, at emma.msrb.org. EMMA
shows real-time trade data as well as the issuer’s
prospectus, which contains official information
about the issue.
Fixed-Income Securities 39
interest on their own bonds for residents while taxing interest on bonds issued by
other states.
• Bond yields are typically stated on a before-tax basis, which puts municipal
bonds at a disadvantage, since they are tax exempt. The TEY converts a munic-
ipal bond yield into its equivalent before-tax basis, thus allowing investors to
compare bond yields across the board.
Corporates In 2018, the size of the corporate bond market was estimated
to be $9 trillion; compared to $15 trillion for the U.S. Treasury market. Most
larger corporations issue corporate bonds to finance operations and fund capi-
tal investment. At any given time, most corporations have several bond issues
outstanding.
Although an investor can find a wide range of maturities, coupons, and special
features available from corporates, the typical corporate bond matures in 20 to 40
years, pays semiannual interest, and is generally issued with a price close to par
value, which is almost always $1,000. Credit quality across corporate bonds varies
widely.
Corporate bonds are senior securities. That is, they are senior to any preferred
and common stock of a corporation in terms of priority of payment and in case of
bankruptcy and liquidation. However, within the bond category itself, there are vari-
ous degrees of security.
• The most common type of unsecured bond is the debenture, a bond backed
only by the issuer’s overall financial soundness.22
Debentures can be subordinated, resulting in a claim on income that stands
below (subordinate to) the claim of the other debentures.
Convertible bonds Some bonds have a built-in conversion feature. The holders
of these bonds have the option to convert the bonds into common stock whenever
they choose. Typically, the bonds are exchanged with the issuer for a specified num-
ber of common shares, with no cash payment required. Convertible bonds can be
considered two securities simultaneously: a fixed-income security paying a specified
interest payment and a claim on the common stock that becomes increasingly valu-
able as the price of the underlying common stock rises. Thus, convertible prices
may fluctuate over a fairly wide range, depending on whether the convertible is
trading like other fixed-income securities or is trading to reflect the price of the
underlying common stock.
Corporate Bonds Long-
term debt securities sold
by corporations
Senior Securities Securi-
ties that have precedence
over other specified secu-
rities in terms of payment
or in case of liquidation
Debenture An unsecured
bond backed by the gen-
eral credit worthiness of
the firm
An investor in the 28 percent marginal tax bracket who is
offered a 5 percent municipal bond would have to receive
0 05
1 0 28 6 94
.
( . ) . %
from a comparable taxable bond to be as well off.
EXAMPLE 2.5
22 Bonds that are “secured” by a legal claim to specific assets of the issuer are called mortgage bonds.
40 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
Bond ratings Corporate and municipal bonds, unlike Treasury securities, carry
the risk of default by the issuer. Rating agencies such as S&P Corporation, Moody’s
Investors Service, Inc., and Fitch Ratings provide investors with bond ratings—that
is, opinions on the relative quality of most large corporate and municipal bonds, as
well as commercial paper. By carefully analyzing the issues in detail, the rating firms,
in effect, perform the credit analysis for the investor.
S&P bond ratings consist of letters ranging from AAA, AA, A, BBB, and so on, to
D. (Moody’s corresponding ratings are Aaa, Aa, A, Baa, to D.) Plus or minus signs
can be used to provide more detailed standings within a given category.23 Exhibit 2.4
Bond Ratings Letter rat-
ings assigned to bonds by
rating agencies to express
the relative probability of
default
EXHIBIT 2.4 | Standard & Poor’s Debt-Rating Definitions
AAA The obligor’s capacity to meet its financial commitment on the obligation is extremely strong.
AA The obligor’s capacity to meet its financial commitment on the obligation is very strong.
A The obligor is somewhat more susceptible to the adverse effects of changes in circumstances and economic
conditions relative to obligors in higher-rated categories. However, the obligor’s capacity is still strong.
BBB The obligation exhibits adequate protection parameters. However, adverse economic conditions or
changing circumstances are more likely (relative to higher-rated obligations) to lead to a weakened capacity
of the obligor to meet its financial commitment.
BB The obligation is less vulnerable to nonpayment than other speculative issues. However, it faces major
ongoing uncertainties or exposure to adverse business, financial, or economic conditions which could lead
to the obligor’s inadequate capacity to meet its financial commitment on the obligation.
B The obligation is more vulnerable to nonpayment than obligations rated “BB,” but the obligor currently has the
capacity to meet its financial commitment on the obligation. Adverse business, financial, or economic conditions
will likely impair the obligor’s capacity or willingness to meet its financial commitment on the obligation.
CCC The obligation is vulnerable to nonpayment and is dependent on favorable business, financial, and
economic conditions for the obligor to meet its financial commitment on the obligation. In the event of
adverse business, financial, or economic conditions, the obligor is not likely to have the capacity to meet its
financial commitment on the obligation.
CC The obligation is currently highly vulnerable to nonpayment. Default has not yet occurred, but eventual
default is expected as a virtual certainty.
C The obligation is currently highly vulnerable to nonpayment, and the obligation is expected to have lower
relative seniority or lower ultimate recovery compared to obligations that are rated higher.
D The obligation is in default or in breach on an imputed promise.
+ or − The ratings from “AA” to “CCC” may be modified with the addition of a plus (+) or minus (−) sign to show
relative standing within the major rating categories.
23 Moody’s uses numbers (i.e., 1, 2, and 3) to designate quality grades further. For example, bonds could
be rated Aa1 or Aa2.
Investments Intuition
Investors do not receive the conversion option
free. Convertible bonds pay a lower interest rate
than would otherwise be paid, resulting in a
lower interest return to investors. Many convertible
bond issuers are young, growing companies that
need the cash to grow. They are able to conserve
precious cash by lowering interest payments.
The issuing firm hopes that eventually the bonds
will be converted into common stock because
that means the company was successful and
the stock price increased. Convertible bonds are
often referred to as “delayed equity financing.”
Fixed-Income Securities 41
shows S&P rating definitions and provides an explanation of the considerations on
which the ratings are based.
The first four categories, AAA through BBB, represent investment-grade securi-
ties. AAA securities are judged to have very strong capacity to meet all obligations,
whereas BBB securities are considered to have adequate capacity. The difference
between a rating of BBB and BB is very significant, as many institutional investors
are not allowed to hold securities rated below BBB. Thus, if a security is downgraded
from BBB to BB, these investors are forced to sell the downgraded bonds.
Of the large number of corporate bonds outstanding, traditionally the vast major-
ity (based on the value of bonds outstanding) have been rated A or better. Bonds
rated BB, B, CCC, and CC are regarded as speculative securities in terms of the
issuer’s ability to meet its contractual obligations. Bonds rated C are highly vulner-
able to nonpayment, and bonds rated D are in default.
Despite their widespread acceptance and use, bond ratings have some limita-
tions. The rating agencies may disagree on their evaluations. Furthermore, because
most bonds are in the top four categories, it seems safe to argue that not all issues
in a single category (such as A) can be equally risky. It is extremely important to
remember that bond ratings are a reflection of the relative probability of default, which says
little or nothing about the absolute probability of default. Finally, it is important to
remember that, like most people and institutions in life, rating agencies aren’t per-
fect. Occasionally, they really fail. For example, the agencies came under tremen-
dous criticism in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, particularly with respect
to mortgage-backed securities (MBSs). Many MBSs that were rated AAA failed as
they were backed by subprime loans that defaulted. It came to light that the credit
valuation models used by the rating agencies didn’t properly account for potential
widespread default by home borrowers.
Perhaps the biggest problem with credit rating agencies is that the issuers pay to
have their bonds rated. If GM has a bond issue and wants Moody’s to rate it, GM
pays the bill. There is a fairly obvious conflict of interest evident with this structure.
The major rating agencies (S&P, Moody’s, and Fitch) compete for business. Firms
want high ratings on their bond issues because it lowers the firms’ interest expense.
Don’t you think that if you could hire the person who grades your college papers
and examinations you might earn higher grades?
Junk bonds The term junk bonds refers to high-risk, high-yield bonds that carry
ratings of BB (S&P) or Ba (Moody’s) or lower. An alternative, and more reassuring,
name used to describe this area of the bond market is the high-yield debt market.
According to data from Moody’s, the default rate on junk bonds averaged 4.8 per-
cent from 1983 through 2013. Default rates vary widely, as in the throes of the finan-
cial crisis in 2009, they spiked to over 14 percent, while falling to 3 percent in 2017.
As you would suspect, default rates are highly related to economic conditions.
Junk Bonds Bonds that
carry ratings of BB or
lower
In September 2011, with the European fiscal crisis
regularly in the news, it was reported that Moody’s
Investors Services was expected to cut the ratings of three large French banks
because of their large holdings of Greek government debt. Expectations of
this move lowered investor confidence in French banks and led to falling
stock prices for these institutions. Security prices are determined largely by
the expectations of market participants.
EXAMPLE 2.6
42 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
Prior to the 1980s, most junk bonds were actually investment grade when they
were issued. The creditworthiness of these bonds declined due to poor performance
of the issuer. These bonds are often referred to as “fallen angels.” What changed in
the 1980s was that more bonds were issued with below-investment-grade ratings to
finance the wave of leveraged buyouts that were prominent at the time.
Asset-backed securities The money and capital markets are constantly adapting
to meet new requirements and conditions. This has given rise to new types of securi-
ties that were not previously available.
Securitization refers to the transformation of illiquid, risky individual loans into
more liquid, less risky securities referred to as Asset-Backed Securities (ABSs). An
asset-backed security is a securitized interest in a pool of assets. To create an ABS, a
corporation creates a trust and sells it a group of assets. The trust, in turn, sells secu-
rities to investors. Legal safeguards are established to protect investors from possible
bankruptcy of the corporation.
Asset-backed securities proliferated prior to 2008 as financial institutions rushed to
securitize various types of loans. The volume of asset-backed securities issued in the
United States peaked at over $750 billion in 2006. In 2010, the volume had fallen to
$107 billion and has been steadily rising as we move further from the financial crisis.
ABSs can be structured into “tranches,” 24 or different classes, which are priced
according to the degree of risk. Different classes can have different credit ratings,
and tranches may be structured with different average maturities. As for risks, secu-
ritization works best when packaged loans are homogeneous, so that income streams
and risks are more predictable. This is not the case for some of the newer loans
being considered for packaging, such as loans for boats and motorcycles. These
loans offer less information, which results in more risk from unanticipated factors.
Asset- Backed Security
(ABS) Security issued
against some type of
asset-linked debt, such as
credit card receivables or
mortgages
A few examples of rating agency miscues include the
following events. In December 2001, Enron was rated
investment grade on a Friday. On Sunday, it filed for bankruptcy. Also at
that time, S&P rated Tyco bonds as investment grade (BBB), although the
bonds had junk bond yields. And by the time the rating services downgraded
WorldCom to junk status in May 2002, the market had reflected that fact for
some time. The lesson that investors should take from this is that bond ratings
are simply one piece of information. They don’t substitute for investors doing
their own analysis (or “due diligence”).
EXAMPLE 2.7
Concepts in Action
Do You Want a Tailor-Made Fixed-Income
Security?
Tailor-made suits are better than suits off the
rack, so tailor-made securities must be better
than standard offerings. In theory that sounds
correct, but practice is often much different than
theory. By definition, structured products are
financial assets consisting of several components
combined together to create a specific risk–
return profile that is attractive to specific inves-
tors. Structured products range from financial
products whose returns are linked to individual
24 Tranche is actually a French word meaning “slice” or “portion.” ABSs and MBSs are created by taking
a large pool of loans and slicing them up into smaller and smaller segments. Each of these segments
becomes a security on its own.
Fixed-Income Securities 43
Returns on Fixed-Income Securities
Returns on fixed-income securities fluctuate widely with changes in demand and
supply conditions and inflationary expectations. As we would expect on the basis of
the risk–return trade-off, corporate bond yields exceed Treasury yields, and lower-
rated corporates yield more than higher-rated bonds. The yield on municipal bonds
is below other rates, but we must remember that munis are tax exempt. To make
them comparable, the municipal bond yield is adjusted to a TEY. When this is done,
their rates are much closer to taxable rates. Investors can obtain daily information
on the rates available on fixed-income securities in the The Wall Street Journal or on
financial websites such as bloomberg.com or finance.yahoo.com.
securities, such as the stock of Apple or a finan-
cial index, such as the S&P 500.
The largest range and greatest use of these
securities has historically been in Europe and
Asia, but some structured products have
attained popularity in the United States. These
products are created (structured) by finan-
cial institutions to offer investors securities that
behave somewhat differently than traditional
securities. Examples of broad classes of struc-
tured products include principal protected
notes, enhanced income notes, performance
participation notes, and leveraged participa-
tion notes.
To get an idea of how structured products
work, let’s consider a principal protected
note. This is a debt instrument that promises
to pay a return based on the performance
of an index (e.g., the S&P 500). The investor
is promised to receive 100 percent of the
investment back, as long as the note is held
to maturity. The investor is also promised a
certain percentage (say, 65 percent) of the
appreciation in the specified index. In effect, by
purchasing the structured product, rather than
the underlying security, the investor is giving up
some upside potential in return for downside
risk protection.
Like any investing opportunity, there are risks
involved. Generally, investors must hold these
products to maturity because there is not a
liquid market for them. Commissions can also
be quite expensive and may not even be readily
apparent to most investors. These products are
often extremely complex and require a great
deal of due diligence (research) on the part
of the investor to fully understand their terms.
Finally, the notes are backed by a financial insti-
tution, which could experience financial prob-
lems or failure
Most prominent banks have large credit card operations.
They frequently take the cash flows from the monthly
payments that customers make on their credit card accounts, securitize them,
and sell the resulting bonds to investors.
Marketable securities have been backed by car loans, credit card receivables,
railcar leases, small-business loans, photocopier leases, aircraft leases, and
so forth. The assets that can be securitized seem to be limited only by the
imagination of the packagers, as evidenced by the fact that securitized asset
types came from a variety of sources including royalty streams from films,
student loans, mutual fund fees, tax liens, monthly electric utility bills, and
delinquent child support payments.
EXAMPLE 2.8
Checking Your Understanding
4. Consider a corporate bond rated AAA versus another corporate bond rated
BBB. Could you say with confidence that the first bond will not default while
the second bond has a reasonable probability of default?
5. Municipal bond yields are stated on an after-tax basis, while corporate bond
yields are stated on a before-tax basis. Agree or disagree, and state your
reasoning.
6. Should risk-averse investors avoid junk bonds?
Equity Securities
Unlike fixed-income securities, equity securities represent an ownership interest
in a corporation. These securities represent a residual claim—after payment of all
fixed-income claims—on the income and assets of a corporation. There are two
forms of equities, preferred stock and common stock. Most individual investors are
primarily interested in common stock.
Preferred Stock
Although technically classified an equity security, preferred stock (which is also
called preference shares) is better characterized as a hybrid security because it has
features of both equity and fixed-income instruments. Equity-like characteristics
include the fact that it has an infinite life, pays dividends, and stands behind fixed-
income investors in a bankruptcy proceeding. Preferred stock dividends are not
legally binding, but must be voted on each period by a corporation’s board of direc-
tors. In addition, due to their infinite maturity, the price fluctuations in preferred
shares often exceed those in bonds.
Preferred stock resembles fixed-income securities in that the dividend is fixed in
amount and known in advance, and preferred stock stands before common share-
holders in a bankruptcy proceeding. The dividend payment stream continues for-
ever, unless the issue is called or otherwise retired (most preferred is callable).
Most preferred stock has a cumulative feature, which means that if the issuer fails
to pay the dividend in any year, the unpaid dividend(s) will have to be paid in the
future before common stock dividends can be paid.25 A large amount of the total
preferred stock outstanding is variable-rate preferred; that is, the dividend rate is tied
to current market interest rates. In addition, more than one-third of the preferred
stock sold in recent years is convertible into common stock at the owner’s option.26
Common Stock
Common stock represents the ownership interest of corporations, and we typically
use the terms “equity” and “common stock” interchangeably. If a firm’s shares are
held by only a few individuals, the firm is said to be “closely held.” Most companies
Preferred Stock An equity
security with an inter-
mediate claim (between
the bondholders and the
stockholders) on a firm’s
assets and earnings
Common Stock An equity
security representing
ownership interest in a
corporation
25 In the event of a series of omitted dividends, preferred stock owners frequently gain voting rights.
26 A recent innovation is mandatory convertible preferred, which automatically converts to common
stock in a few years at a ratio specified at time of issuance.
Equity Securities 45
choose to “go public”; that is, they sell common stock to the general public. This
action is taken primarily to enable the company to raise additional capital (funds)
more easily. If a corporation meets certain requirements, it may choose to be listed
on an exchange.
As a purchaser of 100 shares of common stock, an investor owns 100/n percent of
the corporation (where n is the number of shares of common stock the firm has out-
standing). As the residual claimants of the corporation, stockholders are entitled to
income remaining after the fixed-income claimants (including preferred stockhold-
ers) have been paid; also, in the case of firm liquidation, common stockholders are
entitled to the remaining assets after all other claims are satisfied. As owners, the
holders of common stock are entitled to elect the directors of the corporation and
vote on major issues.
Stockholders also have limited liability, meaning that they cannot lose more than
their investment in the corporation. In the event of financial difficulties, creditors
have recourse only to the assets of the corporation, leaving the stockholders pro-
tected. This is perhaps the greatest advantage of the corporate form and the reason
why it has been so successful.
Characteristics of common stock The par value for a common stock, unlike a
bond or preferred stock, is generally not a significant economic variable. Corpora-
tions can make the par value any number they choose—for example, the par value
of Coca-Cola is $0.25 per share. A typical par value is $1; however, some corpora-
tions issue no-par stock.
The book value of a corporation is the accounting value of the equity as shown
on the books (i.e., balance sheet). It is the sum of the par value of common stock
outstanding, capital in excess of par value, and retained earnings. Dividing total
book value by the number of common shares outstanding produces book value
per share.
The market value (i.e., price) of the stock is the variable of most concern to
investors. The aggregate market value for a corporation, calculated by multiplying the
price per share by the number of shares outstanding, represents the market value
of equity. The aggregate market value is generally referenced as a firm’s market
capitalization, or market cap for short. The market value of one share of stock is
simply the observed stock price. As of December 31, 2018, Coca-Cola’s market price
was $47.35 per share. Because the firm had 4.268 billion shares outstanding, Coca-
Cola’s market cap was $202.09 billion!
Cash dividends The only cash payments regularly made by corporations directly
to their stockholders are dividends. They are decided on and declared by the board
of directors and are generally paid quarterly for firms that choose to pay a dividend.
The vast majority—approximately 80 percent—of companies in the S&P 500 index
pay dividends. One prominent company that has never paid a dividend is Warren
Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway.
Book Value The account-
ing value of the equity
as shown on the balance
sheet
The Coca-Cola Company reported $19.058 billion as
total equity for fiscal year-end 2018. This is the book value
of Coca-Cola’s equity. Based on shares outstanding of 4.268 billion, the book
value per share was $4.47.
EXAMPLE 2.9
46 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
• The common stockholder has no specific promise to receive any cash from
the corporation since the stock never matures, and dividends do not have to
be paid.
Common stocks involve substantial risk, because the dividend is at the company’s
discretion and stock prices typically fluctuate sharply, which means that the value of
investors’ claims may rise and fall rapidly over relatively short periods of time.
• Dividends are extremely important to many investors. Since 1930, over 40 per-
cent of the total return on the S&P 500 Index came from dividends.
The following two dividend terms are important:
• The dividend yield is the income component of a stock’s return stated on a
percentage basis. It is one of the two components of total return, discussed in
Chapter 6. Dividend yield typically is calculated as the most recent 12-month
dividend divided by the current market price.
• The payout ratio is the ratio of dividends to earnings. It indicates the percent-
age of a firm’s earnings paid out in cash to its stockholders. The complement
of the payout ratio, or (1.0 − payout ratio), is the retention or plowback ratio, and
it indicates the percentage of a firm’s current earnings retained by the firm for
reinvestment purposes.
How dividends are paid Dividends traditionally are declared and paid quarterly,
although a few firms, such as Disney, have moved to semi-annual dividend payments.
To receive a declared dividend, an investor must be a holder of record on the specified
Dividend Yield Dividend
per share divided by
current stock price
Payout Ratio Dividends
divided by earnings
Investments Intuition
Companies may choose to repurchase their
stock as an alternative way to affect their stock-
holders. In effect, cash is paid by the company
to its stockholders, and the number of shares is
reduced.
Some investors prefer companies that pay
cash dividends, while others prefer investing
in companies that repurchase shares. Cash
dividend advocates contend that a steady
stream of dividends provides value to inves-
tors as their capital is returned over time.
Investors can choose to take those dividends
and (1) reinvest them in the company’s
shares, (2) invest in other firms, or (3) increase
their current consumption of goods and
services.
Stock repurchases (sometimes called “buy-
backs”) are typically done in the open market.
The company purchases shares from investors
who choose to sell their stock at the prevail-
ing market price. Investors who don’t sell their
shares benefit because they now own a larger
percentage of the company. Some market
watchers contend that stock repurchases are
signals that management believes that the stock
is undervalued and is a good buy.
As is generally the case with most investment
decisions, taxes are also a consideration. Buy-
backs, relative to dividend payments, are often
considered to be more tax efficient as a method
to distribute excess cash because only the share-
holders who want to sell their stock will incur a
tax liability. In contrast, all shareholders incur a
tax liability when dividends are paid.
46 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
• The common stockholder has no specific promise to receive any cash from
the corporation since the stock never matures, and dividends do not have to
be paid.
Common stocks involve substantial risk, because the dividend is at the company’s
discretion and stock prices typically fluctuate sharply, which means that the value of
investors’ claims may rise and fall rapidly over relatively short periods of time.
• Dividends are extremely important to many investors. Since 1930, over 40 per-
cent of the total return on the S&P 500 Index came from dividends.
The following two dividend terms are important:
• The dividend yield is the income component of a stock’s return stated on a
percentage basis. It is one of the two components of total return, discussed in
Chapter 6. Dividend yield typically is calculated as the most recent 12-month
dividend divided by the current market price.
• The payout ratio is the ratio of dividends to earnings. It indicates the percent-
age of a firm’s earnings paid out in cash to its stockholders. The complement
of the payout ratio, or (1.0 − payout ratio), is the retention or plowback ratio, and
it indicates the percentage of a firm’s current earnings retained by the firm for
reinvestment purposes.
How dividends are paid Dividends traditionally are declared and paid quarterly,
although a few firms, such as Disney, have moved to semi-annual dividend payments.
To receive a declared dividend, an investor must be a holder of record on the specified
Dividend Yield Dividend
per share divided by
current stock price
Payout Ratio Dividends
divided by earnings
Investments Intuition
Companies may choose to repurchase their
stock as an alternative way to affect their stock-
holders. In effect, cash is paid by the company
to its stockholders, and the number of shares is
reduced.
Some investors prefer companies that pay
cash dividends, while others prefer investing
in companies that repurchase shares. Cash
dividend advocates contend that a steady
stream of dividends provides value to inves-
tors as their capital is returned over time.
Investors can choose to take those dividends
and (1) reinvest them in the company’s
shares, (2) invest in other firms, or (3) increase
their current consumption of goods and
services.
Stock repurchases (sometimes called “buy-
backs”) are typically done in the open market.
The company purchases shares from investors
who choose to sell their stock at the prevail-
ing market price. Investors who don’t sell their
shares benefit because they now own a larger
percentage of the company. Some market
watchers contend that stock repurchases are
signals that management believes that the stock
is undervalued and is a good buy.
As is generally the case with most investment
decisions, taxes are also a consideration. Buy-
backs, relative to dividend payments, are often
considered to be more tax efficient as a method
to distribute excess cash because only the share-
holders who want to sell their stock will incur a
tax liability. In contrast, all shareholders incur a
tax liability when dividends are paid.
Coca-Cola’s 2018 earnings were $1.58 per share, and it
paid an annual per share dividend of $1.56. Based on
Coke’s year-end stock price of $47.35, its dividend yield was 3.29 percent. Its
payout ratio was unusually high at $1.56/$1.58, or 99 percent.
date that a company closes its stock transfer books. To avoid problems, the broker-
age industry has established a procedure that counts back two business days from the
holder-of-record date; this is the last day that the stock purchaser has the right to the
dividend. Therefore, one business day before the holder-of-record date, the right to
the dividend leaves the stock; for that reason this date is called the ex-dividend date.
Stock dividends and stock splits A stock dividend is a payment by the corpora-
tion in shares of stock instead of cash. A stock split is a corporate action in which
a firm divides each existing share outstanding into multiple shares. On a practical
basis, there is little difference between a stock dividend and a stock split; a stock split
is essentially a large stock dividend.27
The important question to investors is the value of the distribution, whether a
dividend or a split. It is clear that the recipient has more shares (i.e., more pieces
of paper), but has anything of real value been received? Other things being equal,
these additional shares do not represent additional value because proportional own-
ership has not changed. Quite simply, the pieces of paper, stock certificates, have
been repackaged.28 That is, the proverbial pie has been cut into more pieces with no
change in its total size. For example, if you own 1,000 shares of a corporation that
has 100,000 shares of stock outstanding, your proportional ownership is 1 percent;
with a 2-for-1 stock split, your proportional ownership is still 1 percent because you
now own 2,000 shares out of a total of 200,000 shares outstanding.
So, if nothing really changes, why do companies split their stock? This is the
subject of debate in academic finance, but three reasons are often cited. First, many
analysts believe that there is a preferred trading range for stocks. The vast majority
of stocks trade between $10 and $100. Once a stock is outside of that trading range,
it is less attractive to some investors. Second, stock splits convey positive information
about a firm’s performance, as successful companies split their stock. Finally, splits
generate publicity and that may be helpful in attracting investor interest.
Stock Dividend A pay-
ment by the corporation
in shares of stock rather
than cash
Stock Split A corporate
action that divides each
share into multiple shares
Concepts in Action
An Argument against Stock Splits
Some companies choose not to split their stock.
As of early 2019, Berkshire Hathaway Class A
shares were selling for over $300,000 for a single
share of stock! Chairman Warren Buffett believes
that such a high stock price keeps out frivolous
investors and leads to a more stable shareholder
base. And who can argue with him? Berkshire
Hathaway is one of the most successful com-
panies in the world.
Assume that the board of directors of Coca-Cola meets
on May 26 and declares a quarterly dividend, payable on
July 2. May 26 is called the declaration date. The board will declare a holder- of-
record date—say, Thursday, June 12. The books close on this date, but Coke
goes ex-dividend on Wednesday, June 11. To receive this dividend, an investor
must purchase the stock by Tuesday, June 10. The dividend will be mailed to
the stockholders of record on the payment date, July 2.
EXAMPLE 2.11
27 With a stock split, the per share book value of equity is changed; for example, it is cut in half with a
2-for-1 split.
28 Stock data, as reported to investors in most investment information sources, typically are adjusted for
stock dividends and stock splits. Obviously, such adjustments must be made in order to make compari-
sons legitimate.
48 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
P/E ratio (earnings multiplier) The P/E ratio, also referred to as the earnings mul-
tiplier, is calculated as the ratio of the current stock price to some measure of the firm’s
annual earnings per share. It is standard investing practice to refer to stocks as selling
at, say, 10 times earnings or 25 times earnings. Investors have traditionally used such
a classification to categorize stocks. Growth stocks, for example, typically sell at high
multiples, compared to the average stock, because investors are willing to pay more for
their expected higher earnings growth. Variations of this ratio are often used in the
valuation of common stocks. Price-to-earnings multiples are readily available in news-
papers, on financial websites, and in financial databases. In fact, the P/E ratio in its
various forms is one of the best-known and most often cited variables in security analy-
sis and is familiar to almost all investors.29 What most people do not realize though
is that not all sources calculate P/E ratios in an identical manner. In calculating P/E
ratios, all of the methods use the current stock price in the numerator. However, there
are a variety of alternatives for the earnings measure used in the denominator. A few of
the alternative methods used in calculating the P/E ratio are shown below:
• Historical P/E based on the last full fiscal year’s earnings (also known as a
trailing P/E).
• Historical P/E based on the last 12 months of earnings (commonly known
as trailing 12 months (TTM), but practically speaking it is really the last four
quarters)—also referred to as a trailing P/E. This is the method used by
Yahoo! Finance.
• Leading P/E based on a forecast of the next fiscal year’s earnings.
• Leading P/E based on a forecast of the next four quarters’ earnings.
• P/E based on a combination of the last two historical quarters plus the next
two forecast quarters. This is the method used by Value Line. 30
Because the price of a stock, which is determined in the marketplace, is divided by
its earnings, the P/E ratio shows how much the market as a whole is willing to pay
per dollar of earnings.
P/E Ratio (Earnings
Multiplier) The ratio of
stock price to historical or
estimated earnings
A 5 percent stock dividend would entitle an owner of 100
shares of a particular stock to an additional five shares. A
2-for-1 stock split would double the number of shares of stock outstanding and
double an individual owner’s number of shares (e.g., from 100 shares to 200
shares). The split would also cut the stock price in half at the time of the split.
EXAMPLE 2.12
The price of Coca-Cola at year-end 2018 was $47.35 and
the firm’s most recent 12-month trailing earnings per share
(EPS) was $1.58. Therefore, Coke’s trailing P/E ratio was 29.97. Bloomberg
estimated Coke’s 2019 EPS at $1.78, producing a leading (forward) P/E of 26.60
for Coke. Note that for a growing firm, its trailing P/E will exceed its forward P/E
Equity Securities 49
Investing Globally in Equities
U.S. investors, like investors in many other countries, invest in foreign securities as they
seek higher returns and possibly lower risks. Furthermore, changes in currency values
can greatly increase interest in owning foreign securities. For example, if U.S. inves-
tors forecast that the dollar will fall in value, investing in foreign securities is undertaken
to benefit from the decline. While U.S. investors typically choose to use investment
companies—mutual funds, closed-end funds, and exchange-traded funds—to pursue
international investing, some investors choose to buy individual foreign securities.
American depository receipts (ADRs) A popular way to buy foreign companies
is to purchase American Depository Receipts (ADRs). ADRs represent indirect own-
ership of a specified number of shares of a foreign company. These shares are held
on deposit in a bank in the issuing company’s home country, and the ADRs are
issued by U.S. banks called depositories. In effect, ADRs are tradable receipts issued
by a depository that has physical possession of the foreign securities through its for-
eign correspondent bank or custodian. The bank (or its correspondent) holding the
securities collects the dividends, pays any applicable foreign withholding taxes, con-
verts the remaining funds into dollars, and pays this amount to the ADR holders.31
ADRs are an effective way for an American investor to invest in individual for-
eign stocks without having to worry about currency conversions, bank accounts,
and brokerage issues. Currently, there are literally hundreds of ADRs listed on U.S.
exchanges and markets. For example, there are more than 100 ADRs from Brazil
alone that trade on U.S. exchanges and over the counter. Examples of well-known
companies that trade as ADRs include Baidu, Toyota, Volvo, Sony, and British Petro-
leum. The prices of ADRs are quoted in dollars, and dividends are paid in dollars.
Note that while some companies in developing countries have issued ADRs, other
prominent foreign companies have no ADR that trades in the United States.
American Depository
Receipt (ADR) A security
representing an ownership
interest in the stock of a
foreign company
Petrobras, a large energy company in Brazil, has an
ADR listed on the NYSE. On the other hand, Samsung,
a major producer of consumer products, has no ADR traded in the United
States. However, an investor could buy the South Korea exchange-traded fund
which has Samsung as one of its major holdings (exchange-traded funds are
explained in Chapter 3).
EXAMPLE 2.14
Concepts in Action
Think Globally, Invest Locally
While most investors recognize the benefits of
global diversification, they concentrate their hold-
ings in their own domestic markets. This tendency
is known as “home country bias.” A 2013 Franklin
Templeton Global Investor Sentiment Survey
showed that while 65 percent of the world’s
investments (as measured by market capitaliza-
tion) are outside of the United States, 39 percent
of investors had all of their assets invested in the
United States. A Fidelity study showed that U.S.
investors, on average, keep about 72 percent of
their investments in their home market
54 Chapter 2 Investment Alternatives
• In general terms, buyout funds attempt to revitalize established firms, whereas
venture capital funds are involved in creating new firms.
• Derivative securities include options and futures.
• Options allow both buyers and sellers (writers) to speculate on and/or hedge
the price movements of stocks for which these claims are available. Calls (puts)
are rights to purchase (sell) a common stock at a specified price within a speci-
fied future time.
• Futures contracts provide for the future exchange of a particular asset between
a buyer and a seller. Securities that combine characteristics of both securi-
ties—options on futures—are also available.
Questions
2.1 What is meant by “indirect” investing?
2.2 What does it mean for Treasury bills to be sold at a
discount?
2.3 Distinguish between a negotiable certificate of
deposit and the certificate of deposit discussed in the
section “Nonmarketable Financial Assets.”
2.4 Name the four issuers of bonds discussed in this
chapter. Which do you think would be most risky as a
general proposition?
2.5 From an issuer standpoint, what is the distinction
between Fannie Mae and Ginnie Mae?
2.6 Name and explain the difference between the two
types of municipal securities.
2.7 What does it mean to say that investors in Ginnie
Maes face the risk of early redemption?
2.8 What are the advantages and disadvantages of Trea-
sury bonds?
2.9 Is there any relationship between a savings bond and
a U.S. Treasury bond?
2.10 Why is preferred stock referred to as a “hybrid”
security?
2.11 Why is a common stockholder referred to as a
“residual claimant?”
2.12 Do all common stocks pay dividends? Who decides?
2.13 What is meant by the term derivative security?
2.14 What is meant by the term securitization?
2.15 Give at least two examples of asset-backed securities.
2.16 Why should we expect six-month Treasury bill rates
to be less than six-month CD rates or six-month
commercial paper rates?
2.17 Why is the call provision on a bond generally a disad-
vantage to the bondholder?
2.18 Is a typical investor more likely to hold zero-coupon
bonds in a taxable account or a nontaxable account?
Why?
2.19 What is meant by home country bias?
2.20 What is an ADR? What advantages do they offer
investors?
2.21 What value do investors derive from stock dividends
and splits?
2.22 What are the advantages and disadvantages of being
a holder of the common stock of IBM as opposed to
being a bondholder?
2.23 Assume you plan to purchase the stock of a company
that is expected to pay a quarterly dividend of $3.20.
The board of directors has declared the dividend
payable on September 1, with a holder-of-record date
of Friday, August 15. When must you buy the stock to
receive this dividend, and how much will you receive
if you buy 150 shares?
2.24 With regard to bond ratings, which of the following
statements is INCORRECT?
(a) The first four categories represent investment-
grade securities.
(b) Ratings reflect the absolute probability of default.
(c) Both corporates and municipals are rated.
(d) Ratings are current opinions on the relative
quality of bonds.
2.25 Preferred stocks and common stocks are similar in
that:
(a) both are equity securities.
(b) both pay a stated and fixed dividend.
(c) the expected return for each can be estimated
with precision for the next period.
(d) both have an equal claim on the income stream
of the company.
2.26 The common stockholder:
(a) is guaranteed a specified dividend return.
(b) is senior to (i.e., ranks above) debtholders in terms
of payment.
(c) takes relatively small risk in any given year.
(d) can best be described as the residual claimant.
2.27 What are the general types of private equity, and how
do they differ?


