498CHAPTER 19
When an investor talks about trad-
ing derivative securities, the com-
mon assumption among most
individuals is that the investor pre-
fers to take on considerable risk.
After all, derivative securities have
been responsible for some spec-
tacular losses throughout history.
For example, in 1998, Long-Term
Capital Management lost over
$4.5 billion trading derivatives,
and in 2012, JP Morgan Chase lost
nearly $6 billion trading derivative
instruments. Based on the many
well-publicized losses attributed
to derivatives trading, you may be
tempted to dismiss derivatives as a
viable alternative for your portfo-
lio. This would be a mistake as derivatives represent a very flexible investment alter-
native that can be used in a variety of ways.
Derivative securities are simply agreements to transfer the ownership of the
underlying securities under specified conditions. In an investment context, deriv-
atives can be used to enhance portfolio risk, reduce portfolio risk, or simply to
generate income. Thus, derivatives can be viewed as an investment tool that offers
investors many opportunities. This chapter analyzes one type of derivative instru-
ment, options, whereas Chapter 20 analyzes another, futures.
After learning more about derivative securities, you may decide that they are
something you want to incorporate into your investment strategy. But even if you
choose not to use derivatives in managing your portfolio, it is imperative that you
have a basic understanding of derivatives because they have become part of the
investment lexicon. So, if you want to participate in investment discussions, you will
need to be equipped with an understanding of derivatives.
This chapter focuses on put and call equity options. Equity options give the holder
the right to receive or deliver shares of stock under certain specified conditions. We
concentrate mostly on options on individual stocks but also consider index options.
Chapters 19 and 20 focus on financial derivatives as opposed to derivatives involving
commodities such as gold and oil.
Options
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain how and why investors use
options in their investment strat-
egies.
• Describe the option alternatives
available to investors and how the
options markets operate.
• Evaluate alternative option trading
strategies.
• Explain the inputs for the Black-
Scholes model and describe the
option valuation process.
Introduction to Options 499
The emphasis here is on how puts and calls work and on their importance to
investors. Options are useful in portfolio and risk management and are used by
both individual investors and portfolio managers.
Why Have Derivative Securities?
Some people wonder why we have derivative instruments such as options and futures,
which allow investors to speculate on securities and indexes. Investors can easily lose
their entire investment in a derivative security by speculating on a price move.
An important reason for the existence of derivatives is that they contribute to
market completeness. A complete market is one where all identifiable payoffs can be
obtained by trading the securities that are in that market. Incomplete markets exist
when investors are not able to exploit all available opportunities.
Derivatives offer an opportunity to limit the risk faced by both individual inves-
tors and firms. They can also be used as a substitute for the underlying positions and
may offer lower transaction costs as well as more liquidity. Finally, derivatives allow
investors to speculate, which involves taking a market position when a change in
prices or interest rates is expected.
• Derivatives have several important applications, including risk management,
trading efficiency, and speculation.
Why Options Markets
An investor can purchase shares of common stock if he or she is bullish about a
company’s prospects or sell short if bearish. Why, then, should we create these indi-
rect claims on a stock as an alternative way to invest? Several reasons have been
advanced, including the following:
1. Puts and calls expand the opportunity set available to investors, making avail-
able risk–return combinations that would otherwise be impossible or that
improve the risk–return characteristics of a portfolio.
2. An investor can establish a position with options for a much smaller invest-
ment than required with the security itself. The buyer’s maximum loss is
known in advance. If an option expires worthless, the most the buyer can lose
is the cost (price) of the option.
3. Options provide leverage—the chance to magnify percentage gains.
4. Using options on a market index, such as the S&P 500, allows an investor to
participate in market movements with a single trading decision.
Introduction to Options
Options on common stocks are created by investors and sold to other investors. The
corporation whose common stock underlies these claims has no direct involvement
in the transaction and is not responsible for creating, terminating, or executing put
and call contracts.
An option is created when someone writes (sells) the option. Options can be
created and destroyed; therefore, there is no predefined number of puts and calls.
Options Rights to buy or
sell a stated number of
shares within a specified
period at a specified price
500 Chapter 19 Options
• A call option on a stock gives the holder the right to buy (or “call away”) shares
of the stock at a specified price any time prior to a specified expiration date.1
Investors purchase calls if they expect the stock price to rise because the price
of the call and the common stock will move up together. Therefore, calls permit
investors to speculate on a rise in the price of the underlying common stock without
buying the stock itself.
• A put option gives the buyer the right to sell (or “put to the seller”) shares of
the stock at a specified price prior to the expiration date.
Investors purchase puts if they expect the stock price to fall, because the value of the
put will rise as the stock price declines. Therefore, puts allow investors to speculate
on a decline in the stock price without selling the common stock short.
Long-Term Options
Long-term options known as Long-Term Equity Anticipation Securities (LEAPS)
were introduced in 1990. These long-term options are available on hundreds of
stocks and many indexes.
LEAPS have original maturities longer than one year and up to three years.
They typically are considerably more expensive than short-term options. Like other
options, they can be used to hedge or speculate.2
Call An option to buy
shares of stock at a stated
price within a specified
period
Put An option to sell
shares of stock at a stated
price within a specified
period
Long- Term Equity
Anticipation Securities
(LEAPS) Puts and calls
with longer maturity dates,
up to three years
A Coca-Cola six-month call option at $55 per share gives
the buyer the right (an option) to purchase 100 shares of
Coke at $55 per share from a writer (seller) of the option anytime prior to the
six-month expiration date. The buyer pays a premium (the price of the call)
to the writer for this option.
EXAMPLE 19.1
A buyer of a Coca-Cola six-month put at $55 per share has
the right to sell 100 shares of Coke to the put writer for
$55 per share. The writer receives a premium (the price of the put) for selling
this option. The put buyer can exercise his or her right any time within the
next six months.
EXAMPLE 19.2
Equity LEAPS are available on over 2,500 individual
stocks including Intel and Adobe, and Index LEAPS are
available on over 20 indexes including the S&P 100 and S&P 500.
502 Chapter 19 Options
2. What does it mean to say a call buyer has a right but not an obligation? What
about the call seller?
3. Suppose you buy car insurance that can be renewed annually. Thinking in
general terms, can this be considered an option? If so, which type?
How Options Work
As noted, a standard call (put) contract gives the buyer the right to purchase (sell)
100 shares of a particular stock at a specified exercise price any time before the expi-
ration date. Options are created by sellers, either individuals or institutions, who seek
to profit from their beliefs about the underlying stock’s likely price performance.
The buyer and the seller of an option have opposite expectations about the likely
performance of the underlying stock, and, therefore, the performance of the option:
• The call writer expects the stock price to remain roughly steady or perhaps drop.
• The call buyer expects the price of the stock to move upward, and relatively soon.
• The put writer expects the price of the stock to remain roughly steady or per-
haps move up.
• The put buyer expects the price of the stock to move down, and relatively soon.
Puts are created in the same manner as calls. A writer creates a put contract and
sells it for the premium, which is paid by the buyer. The writer believes that the
underlying common stock is likely to remain flat or appreciate, while the buyer
believes that the stock price is likely to decline.
Assume Carl is optimistic about Intel’s prospects. Carl
buys a March call option on Intel at a strike price of $40.
Assume the stock price is $41.15, and the premium is $1.60. Carl pays this
premium, a total cost of $160 since 100 shares are involved, plus brokerage
commissions. Three courses of action are possible with any option:
1. The option may expire worthless. Assume the price of Intel fluctuates up and
down but is at $39.25 on the option’s expiration date. The call gives the
buyer (owner) the right to purchase Intel at $40, but this would make no
sense when Intel can be purchased on the open market at $39.25. There-
fore, the option will expire worthless.
2. The option may be exercised. If Intel sells at a price above $40 at option expira-
tion, Carl will exercise the option by paying $4,000 (the $40 exercise price
multiplied by 100 shares) and receive 100 shares of Intel.6
3. The option can be sold in the secondary market. If Intel appreciates, the value
(price) of the call will also appreciate. Carl can easily sell the call in the
secondary market to another investor who wishes to speculate on Intel. Most
investors trading puts and calls do not exercise those that are valuable;
instead, they simply sell them on the open market, exactly as they would
the common stock if they owned it.7
EXAMPLE 19.4
6 Assume that the price appreciates to $50 before expiration. After exercise, Carl owns 100 shares of
Intel worth $50 per share, for which he paid $40 per share (plus the $1.60 per share for the call). An
immediate sale of the stock in the market would result in a $840 gross profit (brokerage costs are not
included here), or [$5,000 − ($4,000 + $160)].
7 American calls on stocks that do not pay a cash dividend should never be exercised before the expira-
tion date. Calls on stocks paying a cash dividend might be exercised before the expiration date.
Checking Your Understanding 503
• Unlike a buyer, who is not obligated to act, a writer may be assigned to take
action in the form of making or taking delivery of the stock.
As with a call, two other courses of action are possible in addition to the exercise
of the put. The put may expire worthless because the stock price did not decline
enough to justify exercising the put. Far more likely, however, the put owner can sell
the put in the secondary market for a profit (or a loss).
What actually happens to puts and calls?
60 percent are
traded in
the marketplace
30 percent expire
worthless 10 percent are
exercised
• Most call and put investors simply sell their options in the open market. There-
fore, they close out their positions before the expiration date.
The Mechanics of Trading
The options exchanges There are several options exchanges, including
the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), the Nasdaq OMX PHLX, the
International Securities Exchange (ISE), the BATS Options Market, the NYSE
Amex Options Market, and the NYSE Arca.9
The options markets provide liquidity to investors, which is a very important
requirement for successful markets. Investors know that they can buy or sell when-
ever they choose at a price set by the forces of supply and demand.
Assume that a writer sells a March Intel put at an exercise
price of $40 when the stock price is $41.15. The premium
is $0.30, or $30 for 100 shares, which the buyer of the put pays and the seller
(writer) receives. Suppose the price of Intel declines to $35 near the expiration
date. The put owner (buyer), who did not own Intel stock previously, could
purchase 100 shares of Intel in the open market for $3,500. The buyer could
then exercise the put, which means that a writer chosen randomly must accept
the 100 shares of Intel and pay the put owner $40 per share, or $4,000 total
(although the current market price is only $35). The put buyer grosses $470
($4,000 received less $3,500 cost of 100 shares less the $30 paid for the put).
The put writer suffers an immediate paper loss of $500 because the 100 shares
of Intel are worth $35 per share but have a cost of $40 per share, although the
premium received by the writer reduces this loss by $30. All brokerage costs
are ignored in this example.8
EXAMPLE 19.5
8 With stock options, the transactor must pay the brokerage commission for buying or selling the stock.
9 In addition, the Options Clearing Corporation reports trading for other exchanges such as the Boston
Options Exchange (BOX) and the NSDQ Nasdaq market. For more details, see http://www.option-
sclearing.com/market/vol_data/main/exchange_volume.jsp.
504 Chapter 19 Options
• Options exchanges make puts and calls a success by standardizing the exercise
date and exercise price of contracts. One Intel May 45 call option is identical
to every other Intel May 45 call option.
The same types of orders discussed in Chapter 5, in particular market, limit, and
stop orders, are used in trading puts and calls. Certificates representing ownership
are not used for puts and calls; instead, transactions are handled as bookkeeping
entries. Option trades settle on the next business day after the trade.
The secondary markets for puts and calls have worked well since the CBOE
started operations in 1973. Trading volume has been large, and the number of puts
and calls available has expanded.
The clearing corporation The Options Clearing Corporation (OCC) performs
a number of important functions that contribute to the success of the secondary
market for options. It functions as an intermediary between the brokers represent-
ing the buyers and the writers. That is, once the brokers representing the buyer and
the seller negotiate the price on the floor of the exchange, they no longer deal with
each other, but with the OCC.
Through their brokers, call writers are effectively contracting with the OCC to
deliver shares of the particular stock, and buyers of calls actually receive the right to
purchase the shares from the OCC.
• The OCC effectively becomes the buyer for every seller and the seller for
every buyer, guaranteeing that all contract obligations are met. This prevents
problems that could occur as buyers attempt to force writers to honor their
obligations.
The net position of the OCC is always zero because the number of contracts pur-
chased must equal the number sold.
Investors wishing to exercise their options inform their brokers, who in turn
inform the OCC of the exercise. The OCC randomly selects a broker on whom it
holds the same written contract, and the broker randomly selects a customer who
has written these options to honor the contract. Writers chosen in this manner are
said to be assigned an obligation or to have received an assignment notice. Once
assigned, the writer cannot execute an offsetting transaction to eliminate the obli-
gation; that is, a call writer who receives an assignment must sell the underlying
securities, and a put writer who receives an assignment must purchase the underly-
ing stock.
A great advantage of a clearinghouse is that transactors can easily cancel their
positions prior to assignment. Since the OCC maintains all the positions for both
buyers and sellers, it can cancel out the obligations of both call and put writers wish-
ing to terminate their position.10
• A writer of a put or call can buy the exact same option and cancel the position
at any time (except in the case of assignment).
Options Clearing Cor-
poration (OCC) Stands
between buyers and sellers
of options to ensure fulfill-
ment of obligations
10 For example, a call writer can terminate the obligation to deliver the stock any time before the expira-
tion date (or assignment) by making a “closing purchase transaction” at the current market-determined
price of the option. The OCC offsets the outstanding call written with the call purchased. A put writer
can also close out a position at any time by making an offsetting transaction.
Payoffs and Profits from Basic Option Positions 507
Selling (writing) a call A writer of an uncovered (naked) call incurs losses if the
stock’s price increases, as shown by the payoff profile in Figure 19.1(b) (note care-
fully that we are not talking here about covered call writing—writing a covered call
is a different situation, as explained below). For a naked call writer, the payoff is flat
at the amount of the premium until the exercise price is reached, at which point it
declines as the stock price rises. The writer loses if the stock price rises, exactly as
the call buyer gains if the stock price rises.
The profit line in Figure 19.3 shows a similar pattern to that of the call buyer, except
now the profit is positive up to the exercise price because the call writer is receiving
the premium. The horizontal axis intercept in Figure 19.3 occurs at the breakeven
point for the option writer—the sum of the exercise price and the option premium
received (note that the breakeven point is identical to that of the call buyer). As the
stock price exceeds the breakeven point, the uncovered call writer loses.
The mirror images of the payoff and profit profiles for the call buyer (Figure 19.2)
and the call writer (Figure 19.3) illustrate an important point.
• Options trading is a zero-sum game. What the option buyer (writer) gains, the
option writer (buyer) loses.
Puts
Buying a put A put buyer makes money if the price of the stock declines. There-
fore, as Figure 19.1(c) illustrates, the payoff pattern is flat to the right of the exercise
price; that is, stock prices greater than the exercise price result in a $0 payoff for
the put buyer. As the stock declines below the exercise price, the payoff for the put
option increases. The larger the decline in the stock price, the larger the payoff.
Breakeven for stock purchase
Purchase the stock
Purchase a call
20
10
0
0 10 20 30
Market price
Profit $Loss
40 50 60 70
–10
–20
Breakeven for call
FIGURE 19.2 Profit and loss to the buyer of a call option
Payoff to call writer at expiration :
if
if
T T( )S E S E
S0 TT E
508 Chapter 19 Options
Once again, the profit line parallels the payoff pattern for the put option at expi-
ration. As Figure 19.4 illustrates, the investor breaks even (no profit) at the point
where the stock price is equal to the exercise price minus the premium paid for
the put. Beyond that point, the profit line parallels the payoff line representing the
investment value of the put.
20
10
0
0 10 20 30
Market price
Profit $Loss
40 50 60 70
–10
–20
FIGURE 19.3 Profit and loss to the writer of a call option
Breakeven for put purchase
Selling the stock short
Purchasing a put
20
30
10
0
0 10 20 30
Market price
Profit $Loss
40 5046 48 60 70
–10
–20
Breakeven for short sale
FIGURE 19.4 Profit and loss to the buyer of a put option
Payoff to put buyer at expiration:
if
if
T
T T
0 S E
E S S E
Payoffs and Profits from Basic Option Positions 509
Selling (writing) a put The payoff pattern for the put writer is the mirror image
of that for the put buyer as shown in Figure 19.1(d). The put writer retains the
premium if the stock price rises and loses if the stock price declines. The put writer
exchanges a fixed payoff for unknown losses.
Writers (sellers) of puts seek the premium income exactly as call writers do. The
writer is obligated to purchase the stock at the exercise price during the life of the
put contract. If the stock price declines, the put buyer may purchase the stock and
exercise the put by delivering the stock to the writer, who must pay the specified
price.
Note that the put writer may be obligated to purchase a stock for, say, $50 a share
when it is selling in the market for $40 a share. Also note that the put writer can
cancel the obligation by purchasing an identical contract in the market.
Some observations on buying and selling options Options are attractive
because of the small investment required and the potentially large payoff. According
510 Chapter 19 Options
to empirical studies, the odds favor sellers. Writing calls produces steady, although
not extraordinary, returns. Call buying is often unprofitable. When buying options,
investors should generally avoid options that expire in a few weeks—about 75 per-
cent of the option premium disappears in the last three weeks of the option’s life.
Selling uncovered options can be very risky. In effect, the reward (premium) does
not justify the risk for most investors.
Some Basic Options Strategies
In the previous section, we examined the payoffs, and profits/losses, for basic
“uncovered” positions involving options. The six uncovered positions are long
stock, short stock, buy call, write call, buy put, and write put. In this section, we ana-
lyze “covered” positions involving hedges.
A hedge is a combination of an option and its underlying stock designed such
that the option protects the stock against loss or the stock protects the option against
loss. We consider the more popular hedges next.
Covered Calls
A covered call involves the purchase of stock and the sale of a call on that stock;
that is, it is a long position in the stock and a short position in a call. 12 The posi-
tion is “covered” because the writer owns the stock and could deliver it if the call is
exercised by the holder. In effect, the investor is willing to agree to sell the stock at
a fixed price in exchange for the call premium.
Using our previous notation, the payoff profile at expiration is:
Hedge A strategy using
derivatives to offset or
reduce the risk result-
ing from exposure to an
underlying asset
Covered Call A strategy
involving the sale of a call
option to supplement a
long position in an under-
lying asset
Payoff of stock
Payoff of call
Total payoff
T
T
T
T
S E
S
S E
S
0
SS
S E
ET
T
Assume an investor purchased 100 shares of Hewlett-
Packard last year for $40 per share and this year, with the
stock price at $48, writes a (covered) six-month call with an exercise price
of $50. The writer receives a premium of $4. This situation is illustrated in
Figure 19.6.
If called on to deliver the shares, the investor receives $50 per share, plus the
$4 premium, for a gross profit of $14 per share (since the stock was purchased
at $40 per share). However, the investor gives up the additional potential gain
if the stock price rises above $50—shown by the flat line to the right of $50 for
the covered call position in Figure 19.6. If the price rises to $60, for example,
the investor grosses $14 per share but could have grossed $20 per share if no
call had been written.
EXAMPLE 19.9
12 If the stock is purchased at the same time as the call is written, it is called a “buy-write.” If the shares are
already owned, it is sometimes called an “overwrite.”
Some Basic Options Strategies 511
• Writing a covered call is typically regarded as a conservative strategy because it
reduces the cost of owning the stock.
Protective Puts
A protective put involves buying a put on a stock that is owned; that is, it is a long
position in both the stock and a put. The put acts as insurance against a decline in
the underlying stock, guaranteeing an investor a minimum price at which the stock
can be sold. In effect, the insurance acts to limit losses or unfavorable outcomes. As
indicated by the following payoff profile, the largest profit possible is the price of
the stock, which is infinite.
Above the exercise price, the payoff reflects the increase in the stock price. Below
the exercise price, the payoff is worth the exercise price at expiration.
Chapter 19 Options
Figure 19.7 shows the protective put versus an investment in the underlying
stock. As always, the payoff for the stock is a straight line, and the payoff for the
option strategy is an asymmetrical line consisting of two segments. The payoff for
the protective put clearly illustrates what is meant by the term truncating the distri-
bution of returns. Below a certain stock price (the exercise price), the payoff line
is flat or horizontal. Therefore, the loss is limited to the cost of the put. Above the
breakeven point, the protective put strategy shares in the gains as the stock price
rises. This is the true benefit of derivative securities and the reason for their phe-
nomenal growth—derivatives provide a quick and inexpensive way to alter the risk
of a portfolio.
• A protective put offers insurance against a decline in the stock price. The
insurance cost is the premium paid for the put.
The diagram for the protective put is identical to the diagram for purchasing a
call except for the vertical axis intercept. This relationship illustrates a well-known
concept called portfolio insurance, which is explained next.
Portfolio Insurance
The potential risk–return modification properties of options, particularly the insur-
ance aspects discussed earlier, are well illustrated by the technique known as port-
folio insurance. This technique is designed to hedge portfolio positions by providing
a minimum return on the portfolio, while simultaneously providing an opportunity
for the portfolio to participate in rising security prices. The technique became very
popular in the 1980s, with many billions of dollars of assets insured.
There are several methods of insuring a portfolio, including options, futures, and
the creation of synthetic options. In practice, it is common to use futures contracts
on market indexes (as discussed in Chapter 20). However, in principle, options can
be used in portfolio insurance strategies, and their use illustrates the basic nature
of a hedge.
The idea behind implementing portfolio insurance with options is simple. A pro-
tective put is purchased that allows the portfolio to be sold for an amount sufficient
to provide the minimum return. The remaining portfolio is invested in the usual
manner. The protective put provides insurance for the portfolio by limiting losses
in the event stock prices decline. The portfolio’s value at the end of the period will
equal or exceed the exercise price of the put.
Portfolio Insurance A
technique designed to
provide a portfolio with a
lower limit on value, while
permitting it to benefit
from rising security prices
Synthetic Options Cre-
ated by a combination of
two options or an option
and shares
Payoff for put
ST
Payoff for protective put
Payoff
Profit
ST
EE
Payoff for stock
ST
E
FIGURE 19.7 Payoff profile and profit/loss for a protected put position
Option Valuation 513
This example illustrates the use of puts in portfolio insurance strategies. In practice,
the exercise-at-any-time feature of American options makes them not only more valu-
able than corresponding European options but also more costly for portfolio insur-
ance purposes. Furthermore, it generally is not possible to find puts and calls with the
exact time to expiration, exercise price, and so on that matches a particular portfolio.
It should be noted that portfolio insurance is not costless. The investor must pay
for the cost of the put, which can be thought of as the insurance premium. If the
stock price appreciates, the premium reduces the investor’s return relative to what
it would otherwise have been.
Checking Your Understanding
6. In terms of payoff and profit profiles, what is the distinguishing characteristic
for the various options positions? How does this differ from simply buying a
stock, or shorting a stock?
7. Why is covered call writing considered a conservative strategy?
Option Valuation
A General Framework
In this section, we examine the determinants of put and call values. If the stock
price, S, exceeds the exercise price of a call, E, the call is said to be in the money and
has an immediate exercisable value. On the other hand, if the stock price is less than
the exercise price of a call, it is said to be out of the money. Finally, calls that are near the
money are those with exercise prices near their current market price, whereas calls
that are at the money are those with exercise prices equal to the stock price.
These same definitions also apply to puts, but in reverse. In summary,
If , the call is in the money and the put is out of the mS E ooney.
If , the call is out of the money and the put is inS E the money.
If , the option is at the money
Chapter 19 Options
Intrinsic Values and Time Values
The price of a call option can be dichotomized in the following manner. If the call
is in the money (the market price of the stock exceeds the exercise price), it has
an immediate value equal to the difference in the two prices. The value is designated
as the call’s intrinsic value; it could also be referred to as the call’s minimum value,
which in this case is positive. If the call is out of the money (the stock price is less
than the exercise price), the intrinsic value is zero; in this case, the call’s price is
based on its speculative appeal or time value. Summarizing, where S = current stock
price:
Intrinsic value of a call maximum S E ,0 (19-1)
Puts work in reverse. If the market price of the stock is less than the exercise price
of the put, the put is in the money and has an intrinsic value. Otherwise, it is out of
the money and has a zero intrinsic value. Thus,
Intrinsic value of a put maximum E S ,0 (19-2)
• An option’s premium (price) will almost always exceed its intrinsic value.13
Consider a stock currently selling at $40. We analyze two options
with exercise prices that are $5 on either side of the stock price.
Exercise Price Option Moneyness (S = $40)
$45 In the money put Out of the money call
$40 At the money put At the money call
$35 In the money call Out of the money put
EXAMPLE 19.11
Assume that on February 10, Skechers closes at $25.70
and a March call option with a strike price of 25 is
available for a price of $1.15. This option is in the money because the stock
price is greater than the exercise price:
Intrinsic value of March call $ $ $25 25 70 25 0 70. .
EXAMPLE 19.12
Assume a Skechers March put available on February 10
has a strike price of $27.50. The current market price of
the stock is $25.70. The price of the put on that day is $1.90:
Intrinsic value of March put $ $ $27 50 27 50 25 70 1 80. . . .
EXAMPLE 19.13
13 In our initial valuation discussions, we assume the underlying stock does not pay a dividend during the
option’s time to expiration.
Option Valuation 515
Arbitrageurs constantly monitor options prices for discrepancies, and their trad-
ing eliminates any discrepancies that occur. Arbitrageurs are speculators who seek
to earn a return by taking positions in securities that they perceive to be mispriced.
A pure arbitrage opportunity occurs when the arbitrageur can construct a riskless
hedge. Short-lived deviations are possible, but they are quickly exploited.
• Options prices exceed intrinsic values, with the difference reflecting the option’s
potential appreciation, which is typically referred to as the option’s time value.14
Because buyers are willing to pay a price for potential future stock-price move-
ments, time has a positive value—the longer the time to expiration for the option,
the more chance it has to appreciate in value. As an option’s expiration approaches,
the time value of the option declines to zero.
An option’s time value is calculated as the difference between the option’s price
and its intrinsic value:
Time value option price intrinsic value (19-3)
We can now understand the premium for an option as the sum of its intrinsic
value and its time value, or:
Premium or option price intrinsic value time value (19-4)
Notice an important point about options based on the preceding discussion. An
investor who owns a call option and wishes to immediately acquire the underlying
common stock will always find it preferable to sell the option and purchase the stock
in the open market rather than exercise the option (at least if the stock pays no
dividends). Why? Because otherwise, the investor will lose the speculative premium
(time value) on the option.
Arbitrageurs Investors
who seek to take advan-
tage of discrepancies in
security prices
For the Skechers options referenced earlier:
Time value of March call $ $ $
Time value of
25 1 15 0 70 0 45. . .
March put $ $ $27 50 1 90 1 80 0 10. . . .
EXAMPLE 19.14
For the Skechers options:
Premium for March call $ $ $
Premium for Mar
25 0 70 0 45 1 15. . .
cch put $ $ $27 50 1 80 0 10 1 90. . . .
EXAMPLE 19.15
14 This is somewhat of a misnomer because the actual source of value is volatility in price. However, price
volatility decreases with a shortening of the time to expiration—hence the term time value.
Consider the Skechers March 25 call option, with the stock
price at $25.70. An investor who owned the call and wanted
to own the common would be better off to sell the option at $1.15 and purchase
the common for $25.70, for a net investment of $24.55. An immediate exercise
of the call option would require the investor to pay $25 for shares worth $25.70,
but at a total cost of $26.15 once the forgone call premium is considered.
516 Chapter 19 Options
In contrast, it can be optimal to exercise an American put early. In some cases,
a put sufficiently deep in the money should be exercised early because the pay-
ment received can be invested to earn a return that exceeds the option’s time
value.
Boundaries on Option Prices
In the previous section, we learned what an option’s premium consists of, but we do
not know what factors affect option prices and the range of values they can assume.
In this section, we learn about the boundaries for option prices, and in the next sec-
tion, we discuss the exact determinants of option prices.
The value of an option must be related to the value of the underlying security.
The basic relation is best understood by considering an option immediately prior
to expiration, when there is no time premium. If the option is not exercised, it
will expire immediately, leaving the option with no value. Obviously, investors will
exercise the option only if it is worth exercising (if it is in the money).
Figure 19.8(a) shows the values of call options at expiration, assuming a strike
price of $50. At expiration, a call must have a value that is the maximum of 0 or its
intrinsic value. Therefore, the line representing the value of a call option must be
horizontal at $0 up to the exercise price and then rise as the stock price exceeds
the exercise price. Above $50, the call price must equal the difference between the
stock price and the exercise price, or its intrinsic value.
For puts, the situation is reversed. At expiration, a put must have a value that is
the maximum of 0 or its intrinsic value. Therefore, the line in Figure 19.8(b) rep-
resenting the value of a put option must be horizontal beyond the exercise price.
Below $50, the put price must equal the difference between the exercise price and
the stock price. Note that a put option has a strict upper limit on intrinsic value,
whereas the call has no upper limit.
• A put’s strike price is its maximum intrinsic value.
What is the maximum price an option can assume? To see this, think of a call.
Since the call’s value is derived from its ability to be converted into the underlying
stock, it can never sell for more than the stock itself. It would not make sense to pay
more for a call than the price of the stock itself.
• The maximum price for a call is the price of the underlying stock.
Based on the preceding, we can establish the absolute upper and lower bounda-
ries for the price of a call option as shown in Figure 19.8(c). The upper boundary
Some Practical Advice
The time to expiration is clearly a major deter-
minant of the value of an option. Most inves-
tors should generally avoid deep in-the-money
and deep out-of-the-money options, because
they have limited liquidity. Investors are gener-
ally better served with near-the-money options
because they are typically the most actively
traded options.
Option Valuation 517
is a 45° line from the origin representing a call price equal to the stock price. 15 The
lower boundary is represented by a 45° line starting at the exercise price. This lower
boundary can be interpreted as the value of the call at the moment the call is exer-
cised, or its intrinsic value.
• The lower boundary for a call is the price of the option at expiration, which
must be either zero or its in-the-money value.
Finally, Figure 19.8(d) illustrates more precisely and realistically the varia-
tion in price for a call option by illustrating how the price of a call varies with
the stock price and the exercise price. The call price is always above intrinsic
value and rises as the stock price increases beyond the exercise price. The time
value, represented by the shaded area in Figure 19.8(d), decreases beyond the
exercise price.
To understand fully the price of a call option, we can use a formal model of call
prices, the Black–Scholes model. The price of a put can also be found from this
model because of a parity relationship between puts and calls.
The Black–Scholes Model
Fischer Black and Myron Scholes developed a model for the valuation of call options
that is widely accepted and used in the investments community.16 The formula itself
is mathematical and appears to be very complex, but it is widely available on cal-
culators and computers. Numerous investors estimate the value of calls using the
Black–Scholes model.
The Black–Scholes model uses five variables to value the call option on a
nondividend-paying stock.17 These five variables, all but the last of which are directly
observable in the market, are as follows:
1. The price of the underlying stock
2. The exercise (strike) price of the option
3. The time remaining to the expiration of the option
4. The interest rate
5. The volatility of the underlying stock
The first two variables are of obvious importance in valuing an option because
they determine the option’s intrinsic value. If it is out of the money, it has only a
time value based on the speculative interest in the stock.
Time to expiration (measured as a fraction of a year) is also an important factor
in the value of an option because value generally increases with maturity. The rela-
tionship between time and value is not proportional, however.
• The time value of an option is greatest when the market price and the exercise
price are equal, that is, the option is at the money. 18
The interest rate affects option values, but the reasoning behind this is often
ambiguous. Furthermore, different sources give different reasons for the relation-
ship between interest rates and option premiums. Suffice it to say that increases in
interest rates increase call premiums and decrease put premiums.
The last factor, and the only one not directly observable in the marketplace, is
the stock’s volatility. The greater the volatility, the higher the price of call and put
options because of the increased potential for the stock price to move. Therefore,
a positive relation exists between the volatility of the stock and the value of call and
put options.19
The Black–Scholes option pricing formula can be expressed as 20
C S N d E
e N drt
[ ( )] [ ( )]1 2 (19-5)
Black–Scholes Model A
widely used model for the
valuation of call options
16 Fischer Black and Myron Scholes, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,” The Journal of
Political Economy, 81 (May–June 1973): 637–654.
17 Options traded on organized exchanges are not protected against cash dividends, and this can have
significant effects on option values. When a cash dividend is paid, the stock price should decline to
reflect this payment. Any event that reduces the stock price reduces the value of a call and increases the
value of a put.
18 If the option is already in the money, a rise in the stock price will not result in the same percentage gain
in the option price that would occur in the previous situation. For out-of-the-money options, part of the
time remaining will be used for the price of the stock to reach the exercise price.
19 “Volatility” is used here as a measure of the variability in the stock price.
20 This version of the model applies to nondividend-paying stocks. Adjustments can be made for stocks
that pay dividends.
Option Valuation 519
where
C
S
the price of the call option
current market price of thee underlying common stock
the cumulative density funN d( )1 cction of
the exercise price of the option
the base o
d
E
e
1
ff natural logarithms approximately
the risk-free
2 71828.
r rate of interest on an annual basis
the time remainingt tto the option’s expiration date expressed as
a fraction o
,
ff a year
the cumulative density function ofN d d( )2 2
To find d1 and d2
, it is necessary to solve these equations:
d S E r t
t
1
2
1 2
0 5ln( ) ( . )
( [( ) ])/
/ (19-6)
d d t2 1
1 2
( [( ) ])/ (19-7)
where
ln( ) log ( )S E S E/ the natural of /
the standard deviation off the annual return on the underlying stock
The five variables previously listed are needed as inputs. Variables 1–4 are imme-
diately available; however, Variable 5 is not because the appropriate measure reflects
expected future volatility in the stock’s price.
Although historical data on stock returns are typically used to estimate this stand-
ard deviation, volatility does change over time. A formula user should try to incor-
porate expected changes in the volatility when using historical data. To do so, the
user should examine any likely changes in either the market’s or the individual
stock’s volatility. Empirical studies have shown that analysts can improve upon vari-
ance estimates that are based purely on historical data.
Because the price of an option can be observed at any time, it is possible to
solve the Black–Scholes formula for the implied volatility of the stock’s return. The
implied volatility is the volatility level for the stock implied by the option price. By
using the observed call price, one can solve the Black–Scholes model for the volatil-
ity level implied by that price.
The Black–Scholes Model
Fischer Black and Myron Scholes developed a model for the valuation of call options
that is widely accepted and used in the investments community.16 The formula itself
is mathematical and appears to be very complex, but it is widely available on cal-
culators and computers. Numerous investors estimate the value of calls using the
Black–Scholes model.
The Black–Scholes model uses five variables to value the call option on a
nondividend-paying stock.17 These five variables, all but the last of which are directly
observable in the market, are as follows:
1. The price of the underlying stock
2. The exercise (strike) price of the option
3. The time remaining to the expiration of the option
4. The interest rate
5. The volatility of the underlying stock
The first two variables are of obvious importance in valuing an option because
they determine the option’s intrinsic value. If it is out of the money, it has only a
time value based on the speculative interest in the stock.
Time to expiration (measured as a fraction of a year) is also an important factor
in the value of an option because value generally increases with maturity. The rela-
tionship between time and value is not proportional, however.
• The time value of an option is greatest when the market price and the exercise
price are equal, that is, the option is at the money. 18
The interest rate affects option values, but the reasoning behind this is often
ambiguous. Furthermore, different sources give different reasons for the relation-
ship between interest rates and option premiums. Suffice it to say that increases in
interest rates increase call premiums and decrease put premiums.
The last factor, and the only one not directly observable in the marketplace, is
the stock’s volatility. The greater the volatility, the higher the price of call and put
options because of the increased potential for the stock price to move. Therefore,
a positive relation exists between the volatility of the stock and the value of call and
put options.19
The Black–Scholes option pricing formula can be expressed as 20
C S N d E
e N drt
[ ( )] [ ( )]1 2 (19-5)
Black–Scholes Model A
widely used model for the
valuation of call options
16 Fischer Black and Myron Scholes, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,” The Journal of
Political Economy, 81 (May–June 1973): 637–654.
17 Options traded on organized exchanges are not protected against cash dividends, and this can have
significant effects on option values. When a cash dividend is paid, the stock price should decline to
reflect this payment. Any event that reduces the stock price reduces the value of a call and increases the
value of a put.
18 If the option is already in the money, a rise in the stock price will not result in the same percentage gain
in the option price that would occur in the previous situation. For out-of-the-money options, part of the
time remaining will be used for the price of the stock to reach the exercise price.
19 “Volatility” is used here as a measure of the variability in the stock price.
20 This version of the model applies to nondividend-paying stocks. Adjustments can be made for stocks
that pay dividends.
Option Valuation 519
where
C
S
the price of the call option
current market price of thee underlying common stock
the cumulative density funN d( )1 cction of
the exercise price of the option
the base o
d
E
e
1
ff natural logarithms approximately
the risk-free
2 71828.
r rate of interest on an annual basis
the time remainingt tto the option’s expiration date expressed as
a fraction o
,
ff a year
the cumulative density function ofN d d( )2 2
To find d1 and d2
, it is necessary to solve these equations:
d S E r t
t
1
2
1 2
0 5ln( ) ( . )
( [( ) ])/
/ (19-6)
d d t2 1
1 2
( [( ) ])/ (19-7)
where
ln( ) log ( )S E S E/ the natural of /
the standard deviation off the annual return on the underlying stock
The five variables previously listed are needed as inputs. Variables 1–4 are imme-
diately available; however, Variable 5 is not because the appropriate measure reflects
expected future volatility in the stock’s price.
Although historical data on stock returns are typically used to estimate this stand-
ard deviation, volatility does change over time. A formula user should try to incor-
porate expected changes in the volatility when using historical data. To do so, the
user should examine any likely changes in either the market’s or the individual
stock’s volatility. Empirical studies have shown that analysts can improve upon vari-
ance estimates that are based purely on historical data.
Because the price of an option can be observed at any time, it is possible to
solve the Black–Scholes formula for the implied volatility of the stock’s return. The
implied volatility is the volatility level for the stock implied by the option price. By
using the observed call price, one can solve the Black–Scholes model for the volatil-
ity level implied by that price.
Option Valuation 521
Summarizing the Factors Affecting Options Prices
If we allow for stocks that pay dividends, we can summarize the factors affecting
options prices into a table with six elements, as shown in Table 19.1. The + sign
indicates a direct relation, and a negative sign a negative relation. The assumption
behind Table 19.1 is that all other variables remain fixed as we consider any of the
six variables individually.
Hedge Ratios
A key concept with options is their use as a hedging device. Although risky assets
themselves, options can be used to control risk. In particular, options can be used to
control the riskiness inherent in common stocks.
To hedge a long stock position with options, an investor would write an
appropriate number of call options to offset a change in the stock price. This
number is given by the hedge ratio, or delta, which is N(d1) from the Black–Scholes
model. 24
• The hedge ratio for an option, commonly referred to as the option’s
delta, indicates the change in the option price for a $1 change in the stock
price.
Since the hedge ratio with a call option is N(d1
), for a put option it is N(d1) − 1.
Hedge Ratio The ratio of
options written to shares
of stock held long in a
riskless portfolio
Delta A measure of how
much an option’s value
should change for a $1.00
change in the underlying
stock price
Consider the information for the call given earlier. Since
the Black–Scholes model uses continuous interest, the
discount factor is expressed in continuous form.23 It is equal to ert or e0.10(0.5)
.
Using a calculator, this value is 1.0513. Therefore,
Price of put / $3 95 40 45 1 0513 6 75. . .
EXAMPLE 19.18
Effects of Relevant Variables on Options Prices
Variable Calls Puts
Stock price + −
Exercise price − +
Time to expiration + +
Stock volatility + +
Interest rates + −
Cash dividends − +
TABLE 19.1
23 The value er is the equivalent of (1 + r) in continuous compounding.
24 Technically, the hedge ratio is the slope of the functional relationship between the value of the option
(vertical axis) and the value of the stock (horizontal axis), evaluated at the current stock pric
522 Chapter 19 Options
Hedge ratios are less than 1.0 because option values change with stock prices
on less than a one-for-one basis. That is, dollar movements in option prices are
smaller than dollar movements in the underlying stock. However, percentage price
changes on the option are generally greater than percentage price changes on
the stock.
Using the Black–Scholes Model
Development of the Black–Scholes model was a significant event and has had a
major impact on all options investors. This model has been the basis of extensive
empirical investigations into how options are priced. How well does this model
work?
The numerous studies that have been conducted offer general support for the
Black–Scholes model and the proposition that options are efficiently priced by the
market. Some deficiencies have been noted. 25 The original Black–Scholes model
is based on some simplifying assumptions, such as no dividends, a constant vari-
ance, and continuous stock prices. Furthermore, the standard deviation used in
the model cannot be observed and must be estimated. Therefore, any observed
discrepancies could reflect errors in the estimation of the stock’s volatility, or other
noise in the data.
Checking Your Understanding
8. Why does an option’s price almost always exceed its intrinsic value?
9. What are the boundaries for the price of a call?
An Investor’s Perspective on Puts and Calls
What Puts and Calls Mean to Investors
Option contracts are important to investors because of their ability to impact
the risk and return of a security or portfolio. Options can be used for various
types of hedging, which are common with risk management strategies. Options
also offer speculators a way to leverage their investment with a strict limit on
downside risk.
In Example 19.17, N(d1
) was 0.4785; therefore, to hedge
a 1,000 share portfolio, the investor should write 21
call options [(1/0.4785) × 1,000 = 2,089.86 individual options or about 21
contracts]. A $1 increase in the stock price should produce approximately
a $0.4785 change in the option price. The loss on the call options written
is 2,100 × $0.4785 = $1,004.85, which is approximately offset by the $1 per-
share gain on the 1,000 shares. A perfectly hedged position leaves total wealth
unchanged.
An Investor’s Perspective on Puts and Calls 523
The risk–return modification properties of puts and calls vary significantly
from other derivative instruments such as futures contracts, which we consider in
Chapter 20. In the case of buying an option, the most the investor can lose is the
premium, regardless of what happens to the stock price; that is, the distribution of
payoffs or profits is truncated.
• An important point about options and their impact on portfolio return and
risk is that the impact is not symmetrical. The distribution of payoffs is truncated.
The Evolutionary Use of Options
Puts and calls on organized options exchanges have been available to investors since
1973, although financial derivatives were being used long before then. Options
have been popular with individual investors since the beginning of CBOE trading,
although the manner in which they are viewed has changed somewhat. At first,
options were viewed more or less as speculative instruments and were often pur-
chased for their leverage possibilities. Covered option writing was used to enhance
portfolio yields. During the 1980s, many investors were selling puts in order to capi-
talize on the rising trend in stock prices. This strategy worked well until the famous
market crash in October 1987. Market conditions change—the market does not
continue to go in one direction without corrections.
The current emphasis by the options markets and the brokerage industry
is on educating investors as to how options can be used efficiently as part of
their portfolio. Investors have continued to learn how to hedge their risk using
derivatives.
Options are increasingly valued in strategic portfolio management because they
allow investors to create strategies that expand the set of outcomes beyond what
could be achieved in the absence of options. In other words, investors and invest-
ment managers sometimes need the nonsymmetric distributions of returns that
Some Practical Advice
Investors who consider buying options as a way
to trade securities should remember the following
important points:
• With options, you have a significant chance of
losing your entire investment. Thus, speculating
in options can be risky.
• With options, there is a small chance of making
a large profit, often 5 to 10 times the original
investment and sometimes more.
Given these two points, options may be attractive
to some investors and very unattractive to others.
The CBOE has a nice tutorial on options for investors,
starting with the basics and going to more advanced
topics—see www.cboe.com. The International Securities Exchange (ISE)
offers an options trading education section on its website. Included are
webcasts, podcasts, and YouTube videos..
An Investor’s Perspective on Puts and Calls 523
The risk–return modification properties of puts and calls vary significantly
from other derivative instruments such as futures contracts, which we consider in
Chapter 20. In the case of buying an option, the most the investor can lose is the
premium, regardless of what happens to the stock price; that is, the distribution of
payoffs or profits is truncated.
• An important point about options and their impact on portfolio return and
risk is that the impact is not symmetrical. The distribution of payoffs is truncated.
The Evolutionary Use of Options
Puts and calls on organized options exchanges have been available to investors since
1973, although financial derivatives were being used long before then. Options
have been popular with individual investors since the beginning of CBOE trading,
although the manner in which they are viewed has changed somewhat. At first,
options were viewed more or less as speculative instruments and were often pur-
chased for their leverage possibilities. Covered option writing was used to enhance
portfolio yields. During the 1980s, many investors were selling puts in order to capi-
talize on the rising trend in stock prices. This strategy worked well until the famous
market crash in October 1987. Market conditions change—the market does not
continue to go in one direction without corrections.
The current emphasis by the options markets and the brokerage industry
is on educating investors as to how options can be used efficiently as part of
their portfolio. Investors have continued to learn how to hedge their risk using
derivatives.
Options are increasingly valued in strategic portfolio management because they
allow investors to create strategies that expand the set of outcomes beyond what
could be achieved in the absence of options. In other words, investors and invest-
ment managers sometimes need the nonsymmetric distributions of returns that
Some Practical Advice
Investors who consider buying options as a way
to trade securities should remember the following
important points:
• With options, you have a significant chance of
losing your entire investment. Thus, speculating
in options can be risky.
• With options, there is a small chance of making
a large profit, often 5 to 10 times the original
investment and sometimes more.
Given these two points, options may be attractive
to some investors and very unattractive to others.
The CBOE has a nice tutorial on options for investors,
starting with the basics and going to more advanced
topics—see www.cboe.com. The International Securities Exchange (ISE)
offers an options trading education section on its website. Included are
webcasts, podcasts, and YouTube videos.
options can provide. Options strategies increase the set of contingencies that can
be met.26
At some brokerage firms, options volume has increased significantly and now
accounts for a sizable percentage of the firm’s revenues. The online brokerage
firms have made options trading much easier and options information, recommen-
dations, and strategies much more accessible. Meanwhile, some investors with a
strong interest in options use so-called options boutiques that cater to options trad-
ers. These specialized brokers, such as OptionsXpress by Charles Schwab and Wall
Street Access, offer complex trades at lower prices than regular brokerage firms,
specialized risk assessment tools, and a staff specifically trained in options.
Stock Index Options
For many investors, an important part of the options market is stock index options.
Rather than concentrate on options for individual securities, investors can buy puts
and calls on various market indexes, thereby taking a position on broad market
movements or market segments.
The Basics of Stock Index Options
Stock index options are available on more than 50 stock indexes, such as the S&P
100, the S&P 500, the DJIA, the Russell 2000, and the NASDAQ 100. Index options
are also available on industry sectors such as technology, oil, gold, and semiconduc-
tors. Index options are also available on foreign markets such as Korea, Germany,
Japan, and the United Kingdom. In addition, long-term index options (LEAPS) are
available for several market indexes.27
Stock index options enable investors to trade on general stock market move-
ments or industries in the same way that they can trade on individual stocks. Thus,
an investor who is bullish on a market index such as the S&P 500 can buy a call on
this index, and an investor who is bearish can buy a put.
• An investor in stock index options can make market decisions rather than
individual stock decisions.
Overall, stock index options are similar to equity options on individual stocks. As
usual, the exercise price and the expiration date are uniformly established. Investors
buy and sell them through their broker in the normal manner. Index option informa-
tion is read in the same manner as that for stock options. Whereas options on individual
stocks generally allow for exercise at any time (i.e., they are American style), options on
stock indexes frequently allow for exercise only at expiration (European style).
• Unlike stock options, which require the actual delivery of the stock upon exer-
cise, buyers of index options receive cash from the seller upon exercise of the
contract.
Stock Index Options
Option contracts on a
stock market index such as
the S&P 500
26 This discussion is based on Richard Bookstaber, “The Use of Options in Performance Structuring,”
Journal of Portfolio Management (Summer 1985): 36–37.
27 In 1986, the S&P 500 Index option was converted to a European-style contract, meaning it cannot
be exercised until the contract expires. The predictable exercise date appeals to institutional investors
when they attempt to hedge their portfolios against losses in volatile markets. Hedgers using standard
index options may find their hedges exercised before the contracts expire, thereby giving an edge to the
European-style contracts.
Stock Index Options 525
The amount of cash settlement is equal to the difference between the closing
price of the index and the strike price of the option multiplied by a specified dollar
amount, generally $100.
Strategies with Stock Index Options
The strategies with index options are similar to those for individual stock options.
Investors expecting a market rise buy calls, and investors expecting a market decline
buy puts. The maximum losses from these two strategies—the premiums—are
known at the outset of the transaction. The potential gains can be large because of
the leverage involved with options.
28 OEX designates an American-style option, while XEO designates a European-style option.
29 Before exercising, the investor should determine if a better price could be obtained by selling the
option.
Assume an investor holds an S&P 100 Index option
(OEX)—the S&P 100 index consists of 100 stocks from
a broad range of industries.28 The strike price is 580, and the investor decides
to exercise the option on a day that the S&P 100 index closes at 588.5. The
investor will receive a cash payment from the assigned writer equal to $100
multiplied by the difference between the option’s strike price and the closing
value of the index, or
S&P
S&P
Index close
Index option strike price
100 588 5
100
.
580 0
8 5
8 5 100 850
.
.
. $ $
The multiplier for this index option is $100—one point = $100. The
multiplier performs a function similar to the unit of trading (100 shares)
for a stock option in that it determines the total dollar value of the cash
settlement. Since options on different indexes may have different multipliers,
it is important to know the multiplier for the stock index being used.
EXAMPLE 19.21
In early April, an investor expects the stock market to rise
strongly over the next two to three months. This investor
decides to purchase an S&P 100 index May 590 call, currently selling for 24,
on a day when the S&P 100 index closed at 588.5.
Assume that the market rises, as the investor expects, to a mid-May level
of 623.81 (a 6 percent increase). The investor could exercise the option and
receive a cash settlement equal to the difference between the index close
(623.81) and the exercise price of 590, multiplied by $100, or 29
623 81 100
590 00 100
.
.
S&P Index close
S&P Call exercise priice
$ $33 81 100 3 381
526 Chapter 19 Options
The leverage offered by index options is illustrated in this example by the fact
that a 6 percent rise in the index leads to a 40.9 percent profit on the option posi-
tion [($3,381 − $2,400)/$2,400]. Obviously, losses can occur. If the market declined
or remained flat, the entire option premium of $2,400 would be lost.
• As with any option, the investor buying an index option has a limited loss of
known amount—the premium paid.
Investors can use stock index options to hedge their positions. For example, an
investor who owns a diversified portfolio of stocks may be unwilling to liquidate his
or her portfolio but is concerned about a near-term market decline. Buying a put
on a market index will provide some protection from a market decline. In effect,
the investor is purchasing a form of market insurance. The losses on the portfolio
holdings will be partially offset by the gains on the put. If the market rises, the inves-
tor loses the premium paid but gains with the portfolio holdings. A problem arises,
however, in that the portfolio holdings and the market index are unlikely to be a
perfect match. The effectiveness of this hedge depends on the similarity between
the two.
If the value of the investor’s portfolio declines by approximately 10 percent (or
$6,000), the portfolio loss will be largely offset by the net gain on the put contract
of $5,000 ($6,000 − $1,000 premium). It is important to note, however, that a par-
ticular portfolio’s value may decline more or less than a market index such as the
S&P 100 or 500.
As before, if the option is held to expiration and a market decline (of a signifi-
cant amount) does not occur, the investor loses the premium. In our example, the
investor would lose the $1,000 paid for the put. This could be viewed as the cost of
obtaining “market insurance.”
Stock index options can be useful to investors who do not have funds available
immediately for investment but anticipate a market rise. Buying calls will allow such
investors to take advantage of market rises if they occur. Of course, the premium
could be lost if the investor’s expectations are incorrect.
Investors can sell (write) index options, either to speculate or to hedge their
positions. If the seller is correct, the profit is limited to the amount of the premium;
if incorrect, the seller faces potential losses far in excess of the premiums received
from selling the options. It is impractical to write a completely covered stock index
Assume an investor has a portfolio of NYSE common
stocks currently worth $60,000. It is early April, and the
investor is concerned about a market decline over the next two months. The
S&P 100 is currently at 588.5, and an S&P 100 May 590 put is available for
10. In an attempt to protect the portfolio’s profits against a market decline,
the investor purchases a put, which represents an aggregate exercise price of
$59,000, calculated as (590 × 100 = $59,000). Assume that the market declines
about 10 percent by the May expiration. If the OEX Index is 530 at that point,
Put exercise price
OEX Index price
$ $
590
530
60 100 6 000,
EXAMPLE 19.23
Summary 527
option because of the difficulty of owning a portfolio that exactly matches the index
at all points in time. Although the writer of an individual stock call option can
deliver the stock if the option is exercised, the writer of a stock index call option
that is exercised must settle in cash and cannot be certain that gains in the stock
portfolio will fully offset losses on the index option.30
The Popularity of Stock Index Options
Stock index put options allow a portfolio manager to hedge equity market risk by
limiting a portfolio’s downside exposure while retaining the upside potential. If the
index rises while the puts are held, the puts serve to insure the portfolio against a
loss. If the index declines, the protective puts limit the portfolio’s downside and
could offset the decline almost entirely in some cases.
Stock index options appeal to speculators because of the leverage they offer. A
change in the underlying index of less than one percent can result in a change in
the value of the contract of 15 percent or more. Given the increased volatility in
the financial markets in recent years, investors can experience rapid changes in the
value of their positions, both up and down.
Introduced in 1983, stock index options quickly became a popular investment
in the United States. Much of the initial volume was accounted for by professional
speculators and trading firms. As familiarity with index options increased, individ-
ual investors have assumed a larger role in this market.
Summary
• Equity-derivative securities include puts and calls, created by investors, and
warrants and convertible securities, created by corporations.
• A call (put) is an option to buy (sell) shares of a particular stock at a stated
price any time before a specified expiration date. An option seller receives a
premium, and the buyer pays the premium.
• Advantages of options include the following: they require a smaller invest-
ment than transacting in the stock itself, the maximum loss is known
in advance, they leverage the stock position, and they expand the oppor-
tunity set.
• Buyers of calls (puts) expect the underlying stock to perform well (poorly).
Writers of each instrument have opposite expectations from buyers.
• A call writer and a put buyer expect the underlying stock price to decline,
whereas a call buyer and a put writer expect it to rise. Options may also be
used to hedge against a stock position by establishing an opposite position in
options.
• More sophisticated options strategies include combinations of options, such
as strips, straps, straddles, and spreads, which include money spreads and time
spreads.
• Options have an intrinsic value ranging from $0 to their “in-the-money” value.
Most sell for more than their intrinsic value due to a speculative premium.
30 Writers of index options are notified of their obligation to make a cash settlement on the business day
following the day of exercise.
Page load complete
528 Chapter 19 Options
• According to the Black–Scholes option valuation model, value is a function of
the stock price, the exercise price, time to expiration, the interest rate, and
the volatility of the underlying stock.
• The available empirical evidence suggests that the options market is efficient,
with trading rules unable to exploit any biases that exist in the Black–Scholes
or other option pricing models.
• Interest rate options and stock index options are also available to investors.
• Stock index options are a popular innovation in the options area that allow
investors to buy puts and calls on broad stock market indexes and industry
subindexes.
• A major distinction with index options contracts is that settlement is in cash.
• In effect, stock index options allow investors to make a market decision and to
purchase a form of market insurance.
• Strategies with index options are similar to those for individual stock options.
Investors can both hedge and speculate.