Common Stock Valuation
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain the foundation of valuation
for common stocks, discounted
cash flow techniques, and the con-
cept of intrinsic value.
• Use the dividend discount model
to estimate the intrinsic value of a
stock.
• Estimate target prices for stocks
using price multiples and firm fun-
damentals.
• Apply the two-stage, three-stage,
and H-model in deriving stock
values.
256CHAPTER 10
The moment you have been wait-
ing for is almost at hand. Having
prepared yourself to manage your
inheritance by learning about top-
ics such as mutual funds, short
selling, portfolio theory, and the
capital asset pricing model (CAPM),
you are now anxious to get out
there and buy some stocks. After
all, you know someone who bought
Amazon in 2009 at $80 and it went
to over $1,800, and you know for
sure this person is not the bright-
est bulb in the chandelier. On the
other hand, you have read horror
stories about the folks who bought
technology stocks which subse-
quently collapsed—and some of
these people were really smart.
So there must be more to equity
investing than meets the eye.
To better understand what differentiates poor performing from strong
performing stocks, you need to bite the bullet and learn about the principles
of stock valuation. The bad news, as you are about to learn, is that valuation
is an art and not a science—it requires judgment as well as skill. The good news
is that learning the basic principles of valuation will give you an advantage
over many investors who simply act on tips or jump in without doing adequate
analysis.
How do investors typically go about analyzing stocks to buy and sell? This chapter
concentrates on the valuation of common stocks, while Chapter 11 concentrates
on how investors should analyze and manage their equity holdings. Here, we con-
sider the major approaches used by investors in the valuation of stocks: discounted
cash flow techniques, target prices, and relative valuation techniques. Every serious
investor should be comfortable with the basic principles of common stock valuation
represented by these approaches.
Common Stock Valuation
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain the foundation of valuation
for common stocks, discounted
cash flow techniques, and the con-
cept of intrinsic value.
• Use the dividend discount model
to estimate the intrinsic value of a
stock.
• Estimate target prices for stocks
using price multiples and firm fun-
damentals.
• Apply the two-stage, three-stage,
and H-model in deriving stock
values.
Overview 257
Overview
Major approaches to valuing common stocks using fundamental security analysis
include:
1. Discounted cash flow (DCF) techniques
2. Multiplier approach
3. Relative valuation metrics
DCF techniques attempt to estimate the value of a stock (its intrinsic value)
using a present value analysis. For example, using the Dividend Discount Model,
the future stream of dividends to be received from a common stock is discounted
back to the present at an appropriate discount rate (i.e., the investor’s required
return) and summed. Alternative DCF versions discount such variables as free cash
flow. The end result is an estimate of the current “fair value” or intrinsic value of
the stock.
The multiplier approach attempts to estimate intrinsic value by multiplying an
estimated firm characteristic by an estimated multiple. The most prominent mul-
tiplier approach relies on estimated earnings per share (EPS) and the earnings
multiplier, the P/E ratio. To implement this approach:
• Estimate EPS for next period, typically the next 12 months.
• Determine an appropriate P/E ratio. Part of this process may involve compar-
ing the company being valued with its peers in order to derive the appropriate
P/E ratio.
• Multiply the estimated EPS by the P/E ratio that has been determined.
While the earnings multiplier is the most commonly used approach, we discuss
several other multipliers that are used in practice. Each approach relies on the same
basic process. The end result for each approach is an estimate of the intrinsic value
of the stock or the estimated value of the stock today.
Relative valuation metrics typically involve the P/E ratio, the Price/Book (P/B)
ratio, the Price/Sales (P/S) ratio, the Price/Cash Flow (P/CF) ratio, and Enter-
prise Value (EV)/earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization
(EBITDA) ratio. With the relative value approach, the emphasis is on selecting
stocks for possible purchase based on a comparison between comparable firms
rather than estimating each stock’s value.
Exhibit 10.1 summarizes the most prominent approaches to common stock valu-
ation. In this chapter, we discuss these approaches in order. Before doing so, how-
ever, let’s briefly consider why it is important to understand the alternative valuation
approaches. It is important to understand DCF models for at least two reasons.
First, virtually all investment professionals that work in valuation agree that the DCF
approach is conceptually correct. It may have its limitations, but we can learn from
it. Second, some of the most popular investment advisory services, in particular
Morningstar and Standard & Poor’s Outlook, rely on a DCF approach.
The DCF approach, however, is not universally relied upon by investment pro-
fessionals. A 2006 study found that practitioners and investment advisory services
often rely on multipliers and relative valuation metrics when making investment
decisions.1
 Valuation Techniques, Variables Used,
and the End Result Sought
Valuation Technique Variables Used End Product Produced
1. Discounted cash flow techniques
a. Dividend discount model Expected future dividends, stockholders
required return (cost of equity capital)
Intrinsic value
b. Free cash flow to equity Expected free cash flow to equity, cost of
equity capital
Intrinsic value
c. Free cash flow to firm Expected free cash flow to the firm, firm’s cost
of capital
Intrinsic value
2. Multiplier approach Estimated firm fundamental (e.g., EPS or
revenue) for next year, combined with
estimated appropriate price multiple
Intrinsic value
3. Relative valuation metrics
i. P/E ratio (price to earnings)
ii. P/B ratio (price to book)
iii. P/S ratio (price to sales)
iv. P/CF ratio (price to cash flow)
v. EV/EBITDA (enterprise value
to EBITDA)
Based on relative judgments Stock selection
260 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
my family, what benefits will my family receive? The answer is a stream of cash
dividends because this is the only cash distribution that a corporation actually
makes to its stockholders. Although a firm’s EPS in any year belongs to the
stockholders, corporations generally do not pay out all their earnings to their
stockholders; furthermore, EPS is an accounting concept, whereas dividends
represent cash payments. Investors cannot spend EPS, but they can spend divi-
dends received.
Stockholders may plan to sell their shares sometime in the future, resulting in
a cash flow from the sale price. However, the value of the cash flow from the sale
is equivalent to evaluating the stream of all subsequent dividends to be received
from the stock. Therefore, we can concentrate on a company’s estimated future
dividends and an appropriate required return.
Applying the DDM
Adapting Equation 10-1 specifically to value common stocks, the cash flows are the
dividends expected to be paid in each future period. An investor or analyst using
this approach carefully studies the future prospects for a company and estimates
the likely dividends to be paid. In addition, the analyst estimates an appropriate
required return or discount rate based on the risk foreseen in the dividends. Finally,
he or she discounts the entire stream of estimated future dividends and adds them
together. The derived present value is the intrinsic value of the stock. This process
is illustrated in Figure 10.2.
The required return is the minimum expected return necessary to induce an
investor to buy a stock, given its risk. Note that it is an expected return, and that it is
the minimum rate necessary to induce purchase.
• The required return, capitalization rate, and discount rate are inter-
changeable terms in valuation analysis. Regardless of the terminology, it is
challenging to determine the precise numerical value to use for a particu-
lar stock.
Because in practice it is not easy to determine a precise discount rate, we will
assume for purposes of this discussion that we know the discount rate and con-
centrate on the other issues involved in valuation, which are difficult enough. The
CAPM model discussed in Chapter 9 serves as a basis for thinking about, and calcu-
lating, a required return.
Required Return The
minimum expected return
necessary to induce an
investor to purchase a
security
Estimate the future
dividends for a
stock
Estimate a required
return or discount
rate
Discount all the
estimated future
dividends
Add all discounted
dividends together
to obtain a present
value
The present value is
the intrinsic value
of the stock
FIGURE 10.2 The process involved with the dividend discount model
The Dividend Discount Model 261
The DDM Equation
The DDM states that the estimated value (per share) of a stock today is the dis-
counted value of all future dividends:
Estimated value of a stock today V D
k
D
k
D
k
0
1 2
2
3
1 1 1 3
1
1
1
 D
k
D
kt
t
t
(10-2)
where
D D1 2, ,… the dividends expected to be received in each futurre period
the required return for the stock which is thek , discount rate applicable
for an investment with this degreee of riskiness the opportunity cost of a
comparable ris
(
kk alternative)
Implementing the DDM
Two immediate issues with Equation 10-2 are the following:
1. Equation 10-2 indicates that investors are dealing with infinity. They must
value a stream of dividends that may be paid forever, since common stock has
no maturity date.
2. The dividend stream is uncertain:
a. There is no specified number of dividends, if in fact any are paid at all.
Dividends are declared periodically by the firm’s board of directors.
(Technically, they are typically paid quarterly, but conventional valuation
analysis uses annual dividends.)
b. The dividends for most firms are expected to grow over time; therefore,
investors cannot simplify Equation 10-2 to a perpetuity as is done with
preferred stock.
Who’s afraid of infinity? From a practical standpoint, the infinity problem is not
as troublesome as it first appears. At reasonably high discount rates, such as 10 per-
cent or more, dividends received 40 or 50 years in the future are worth very little
today so that investors need not worry about them. For example, the present value
of $1 to be received 50 years from now, if the discount rate is 10 percent, is only
$0.0085, which is zero for practical purposes.
Estimating Future Dividends
The conventional solution to the second issue, that the dividend is expected to grow
over time, is to make a simplifying assumption about the expected dividend growth
rate. That is, the investor classifies each stock to be valued into one of three catego-
ries based on the expected growth rate in dividends.
• The DDM is operationalized by estimating the expected growth rate(s) in the
dividend stream.
262 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Checking Your Understanding
1. Why is the required return for a stock also an expected return?
2. What does it mean to say that the estimated value of a stock today is the dis-
counted value of all future dividends?
Growth Rate Cases for the DDM
There are three growth rate cases:
1. The zero-growth rate case: A dividend stream with a zero-growth rate result-
ing from a fixed-dollar dividend equal to the current dividend, D0
, being paid
every year from now to infinity:
∞


0 0 0 0 0 dividend stream
time period0 1 2 3
D D D D D
2. The constant (normal)-growth rate case: A dividend stream that is growing at
a constant rate g, starting with D0
:
D D g D g D g0 0
1
0
2
01 1 1
0 1 2


dividend stream
time periodd
3. The multiple-growth rate case: A dividend stream that is growing at variable
rates, for example, g1 for the first two years and g2 thereafter:
The Zero-Growth Rate Model
A zero-growth rate equates to a fixed-dollar dividend that does not change
over time. For example, a firm pays a dividend of $1.00 a share annually, and
there is no expectation that the dividend will change. The zero-growth case
reduces to a perpetuity. Assuming a constant dollar dividend, which implies a
zero-growth rate, Equation 10-2 simplifies to the zero-growth model shown as
Equation 10-3:
V D
k z0
0 ero-growth rate version of the dividend discount moodel (10-3)
where D0 is the constant dollar dividend expected for all future time periods and k
is the opportunity cost or required return for the stock.
The no-growth DDM is commonly used to value traditional preferred stock,
which, as discussed in Chapter 2, has an infinite life and pays a fixed dividend. The
annual amount of preferred dividends is calculated by multiplying the stated divi-
dend rate by the par value of the preferred stock.
Zero-Growth Rate Case
One of three growth rate
cases of the DDM, when
the dollar dividend being
paid is not expected to
change
Constant (Normal)-Growth
Rate Case A well-known
scenario in which dividends
are expected to grow at a
constant rate over time
Multiple-Growth Rate
Case One of the three
possible forms of the
DDM, involves two or
more expected growth
rates for dividends
D D D g D D g D D g D D g0 1 0 1 2 1 1 3 2 2 1 21 1 1 1
0 1 2 3
d

iividend stream
time period
Growth Rate Cases for the DDM 263
A present value process The discounting process is not apparent when the per-
petuity formula is applied in the zero-growth rate case. Nevertheless, the formula
accounts for all dividends from now to infinity, as with the other DDM cases. It is
simply a mathematical fact—not to mention a great calculation convenience—that
dividing a constant dollar amount by the discount rate, k, produces a result equiva-
lent to discounting each dividend from now to infinity separately and summing all
of the present values.
• In using a DDM to value a stock, an investor discounts the future stream of
dividends from now to infinity.
Present value of growth opportunities The value of a stock can be viewed as
the value of the company’s profitability based on its existing operations plus the
present value of growth opportunities (PVGO). This relationship is demonstrated
by Equation 10-4.
V E
k PVGO0
1 (10-4)
where
V0 = the intrinsic value of the stock
E1 = next year’s forecasted earnings per share (EPS)
k = the required return on the stock
E
k
1 = the no-growth value of the stock
PVGO includes the value of growth in earnings from the firm’s assets that are
currently in place along with expected earnings from future projects that will
expand firm operations. The latter are commonly referenced as the firm’s real
options.
To estimate PVGO, investors can rearrange Equation 10-4 to get PVGO on the
left-hand side. Investors substitute the current stock price for V0 in the equation and
subtract the no-growth value of the stock.
Furthermore, as an extension of Equation 10-4, it is common to derive the per-
centage of a firm’s current stock price that is represented by the firm’s PVGO. For
firms with strong growth prospects, it is common for PVGO to represent 70 percent
plus of the firm’s stock price.
Assume Magna Corporation’s annual-pay preferred stock
has a 7 percent dividend rate and a $100 par value. If an
investor’s required return on Magna preferred is 8.5 percent, the investor’s
estimated value, V0
, for the stock is
V D
k
V
0
0
0
0 07 100
0 085 82 35
264 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
The Constant-Growth Rate Model
A well-known scenario in valuation is the case in which dividends are expected to grow
at a constant rate over time. This constant-growth rate model is shown as Equation 10-5:
V D g
k
D g
k
D g
k
D g
0
0 0
2
2
0
3
3
01
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
 kk (10-5)
where D0 is the current dividend being paid and growing at the constant rate g, and
k is the appropriate discount rate.
Equation 10-5 can be simplified to the following equation2
:
V D
k g
0
1 constant-growth rate version of the dividend discoount model (10-6)
where D1 is the dividend expected to be received at the end of Year 1.
Equation 10-6 is used whenever the growth rate of future dividends is expected
to be approximately constant. In actual practice, it is used quite often because of its
simplicity, and because it is the best description of the expected dividend stream for
a large number of companies, in particular large, stable companies and the market
as a whole.
D0 versus D1 Note that the current dividend (D0
), must be compounded one
period because the constant-growth version of the DDM specifies the numerator as
the dividend expected to be received one period from now, which is D1
. In valuation
terminology, D0 represents the dividend currently being paid, and D1 represents the
dividend expected to be paid in the next period.
Given D0
, which is known and observable, D1 can always be determined3
:
D
D D g
0
1 0 1
current dividend
where g is the expected growth rate of dividends.
At the end of 2018, Amazon’s estimated EPS for 2019 was
$26.66 and its required return on equity was estimated at
13 percent. Amazon was selling at $1,502 per share. Its PVGO was:
PVGO $ , $ .
. $ , . $ , .1 502 26 66
0 13 1 502 205 08 1 296 92.
PVGO as a percent of Amazon’s stock price was: 1 296 92
1 502 0 8635 86 35
, .
, . . %or .
Thus, over 86 percent of Amazon’s stock price could be attributed to investors’
expectations about its future growth prospects
Growth Rate Cases for the DDM 265
Understanding the constant-growth rate model The constant-growth version
of the DDM (Equation 10-6) takes account of all future cash flows from now to
infinity. The mathematics of an infinite constant-growth process reduces to a very
simple expression, masking the fact that all dividends from now to infinity are being
accounted for and discounted.
Growth in stock price The constant-growth version of the DDM implies that the
stock price is estimated to grow at the same rate as the dividends, which is g. In
fact, holding the payout ratio (the ratio of dividends to earnings) constant, the
constant-growth model implies that dividends, earnings, and stock price all grow at
the expected constant-growth rate, g.
How k and g Affect Value
An examination of Equation 10-6 quickly reveals the two major factors affecting the
estimated value of a common stock:
1. If the market lowers the required return for a stock, estimated value will rise.
2. If investors decide that the expected growth in dividends is higher as the
result of some favorable development for the firm, estimated value also rises.
Of course, the converse for these two situations also holds—a rise in the dis-
count rate or a reduction in the expected growth rate of dividends lowers esti-
mated value.
Estimating k and g The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) is commonly used
to derive the required return on equity (k). As an alternative to the CAPM, some
analysts prefer to use multifactor models, such as the three-factor model, to derive
the appropriate discount rate for a stock (k).
There are several means to obtain an estimate of growth (g) for use in the
constant- growth model. The following three general approaches are commonly
used:
1. Obtain an estimate from security analysts or an investment advisory service
such as Value Line Investment Survey or Standard & Poor’s Outlook.
2. Derive an estimate based on a firm’s past growth in dividends or earnings.
According to this approach, future growth is projected to approximate past
growth.
Assume that Summa Corporation is currently paying $1
per share in dividends and investors expect dividends to
grow at 7 percent a year for the foreseeable future. For investments at this risk
level, investors require a return of 15 percent. The estimated value of Summa
today, V0
, is:
V D
k g
V
0
1
0
1 00 1 07
0 15 0 07 13 38
268 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
some period (typically, 2 to 10 years) followed by a steady long-term growth rate
that is sustainable (i.e., a constant-growth rate). This can be described in equation
form as
V D g
k
D g
k g kt
n t
t
n
n0
1
0 1
1
1 1
1
s c
c
(10-7)
where
V
D
0
0
the estimated value of the stock today
the current divvidend
the supernormal or subnormal growth rate for dsg ( ) iividends
the constant-growth rate for dividends
requir
cg
k eed return
the number of periods of supernormal or subnon ( rrmal growth
the dividend at the end of the abnormal gr
)
Dn oowth period
Understanding the equation Notice in Equation 10-7 that the first term on the
right side defines a dividend stream covering n periods, growing at a high (or low)
growth rate of gs and discounted at the required return, k. This term covers the
period of supernormal (or subnormal) growth, after which the dividend is expected
to grow at a constant rate forever. In effect, we must identify each of the dividends
during this abnormal growth period, and then discount them back to the present
using the required return.
The second term on the right-hand side is the constant-growth equation dis-
cussed earlier, which takes the dividend expected for the next period, n + 1, and
divides by the difference between k and gc
.5 Notice, however, that the value obtained
from this second term is the value of the stock at the end of period n, which we shall
call Vn. This value must be discounted back to time period zero by multiplying by the
appropriate discount (present value) factor, which is accomplished in Equation 10-7
by multiplying by 1/(1 + k)n.
The valuation process is as follows:
=
+
0 sof the dividends during the period of unusual growth based on the growth rate
of the terminal price (which is the value of all dividends that are paid from the start
of the constant growth
V PV g
PV
phase through infinity)
Think about the second term in Equation 10-7 as representing the estimated
value of the stock derived from the constant-growth model as of period n. There-
fore, the terminal value as of period n is:
V D
k g
n
n 1
c
Because Vn is the estimated value of the stock as of period n, it must be discounted
back to the present. When it is added to the value of the discounted dividends from
the first term, we have the estimated value of the stock today.
5 The dividend at period n + 1 is equal to the dividend paid in period n compounded by the new growth
rate, gc
. The designation n + 1 refers to the first period after the abnormal growth ends.
Growth Rate Cases for the DDM 269
Figure 10.3 illustrates the valuation of a multiple-growth
rate company. In this example, the current dividend is
$1 and is expected to grow at the higher rate (gs
) of 12 percent a year for five
years, at the end of which time the new growth rate (gc) is expected to be a
constant 6 percent a year. The required return is 10 percent.
The first step in the valuation process is to determine the dollar dividends
in each year of supernormal growth. This is done by compounding the
beginning dividend, $1, at 12 percent for each of the first five years:
D
D
D
D
0
1
2
2
3
1 00
1 00 1 12 1 12
1 00 1 12 1 25
1 00 1
$
$ $
$ $
$
.
. . .
. . .
. .. .
. . .
. . .
12 1 40
1 00 1 12 1 57
1 00 1 12 1 76
3
4
4
5
5
$
$ $
$ $
D
D
Once the stream of dividends over the supergrowth period is determined,
they must be discounted to the present using the required return of 10
percent. Thus,
$ $
$ $
$ $
$
1 12 0 909 1 02
1 25 0 826 1 03
1 40 0 751 1 05
. . .
. . .
. . .
11 57 0 683 1 07
1 76 0 621 1 09
5 26
. . .
. . .
.
$
$ $
$
EXAMPLE 10.8
V0
Vn = The discounted value of all
dividends from Year 6 to ∞,
given a normal growth rate
of 6 percent
∞Time
Vn = $46.64 = The value of the stock
at the end of Year 5
1
Discounted
One year
Discounted two years
Discounted three years
Discounted four years
Discounted five years
Discounted five years
1.12
2
1.25
3
1.40
4
1.57
5
1.76
+$1.03
+$1.05
+$1.07
+$1.09
$1.02
= 1.76 (1.06)
0.10 –0.06
+ $28.96
= $34.22
FIGURE 10.3 Valuing a multiple-growth rate company
270 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Limitations of the multiple-growth rate case As mentioned previously, the
DDM is subject to limitations, which clearly apply to multiple-growth rate models:
a. The model is very sensitive to the inputs. Since a large part of the model
involves a constant-growth rate calculation, a relatively modest change
in one of the parameters has a significant impact on the final estimate
of value.
b. Determining the length of the abnormal growth period is quite difficult to do
in practice. Will it last 5 or 12 years?
c. The model as described previously assumes an immediate transition from
unusual growth to constant growth, in reality the transition may not take
place that quickly.
The three-stage growth rate model A logical extension of the two-stage growth
rate model is the three-stage model. The three-stage model includes three distinct
periods of dividend growth: a near-term period of supernormal growth, followed
by a period of rapid yet diminishing growth, which culminates with a period of
constant growth.
To apply the three-stage model, we rely on Equation 10-7, but recognize that the
period of unusual growth, as represented in the first term in the equation, is com-
prised of two distinct periods of growth: the supernormal growth and a rapid but
diminishing growth period.
Summing the five discounted dividends produces the value of the stock’s
first five dividends only, which is $5.26. To evaluate Years 6 and forward, when
constant growth is expected, the constant-growth model is used:
V D
k g
V D
k g
V
V
n
n 1
5
6
5
5
1 76 1 06
0 10 0 06
46 64
c
c
$
. .
. .
.
Thus, $46.64 is the expected value of the stock as of Year 5. It must be
discounted back to the present using the present value factor for five years and
10 percent, 0.621. Therefore,
V Vn ndiscounted to today PV factor for five years
$
, %10
466 64 0 621
28 960
. .
.V $
The last step is to add the two present values together:
$ present value of the first five years of dividends5 26
2
.
88 96. ,present value of the Year 5 value representing the ddiscounted
value of dividends from Year to
$ t
6
34 22 0. ,V hhe value today of this multiple-growth rate stock
Growth Rate Cases for the DDM 271
The H-Model A variant of the two- and three-stage dividend growth scenarios is
captured by the H-model. The H-model assumes an initial period of supernormal
dividend growth that declines linearly through the supernormal growth period
until it reaches the constant or mature growth phase. Thus, the H-model modifies
the “period of rapid but diminishing growth” phase that is found in the three-
stage model by assuming that the growth diminishes linearly from the first period
until constant growth starts. Based on the H-model, a stock’s value (V0 ) is esti-
mated as follows:
V D g D H g g
k g
C S C
C
0
0 01 (10-8)
where
D0 the current dividend
gS the supernormal growth rate for dividends
gC the constant growth rate for dividends
k required rate of return
H half-life in years of the high growth period (i.e., years of diminishing growth divided
by 2)
An analyst expects Microsoft’s per share dividend to grow
by 14 percent per year from its current annual rate of
$1.84 for the next three years. Further, the analyst expects dividend growth to
diminish by 2 percent each year for the subsequent three years, and finally, the
dividend is expected to grow at 7 percent thereafter.
D1 = $1.84 × 1.14 = $2.10
D 2 = $2.10 ×1.14 = $2.39
D3 = $2.39 ×1.14 = $2.73
D4 = $2.73 ×1.12 = $3.05
D5 = $3.05 ×1.10 = $3.36
D6 = $3.36 ×1.08 = $3.63
D7 = $3.63 ×1.07 = $3.88
Period of supernormal growth
Period of rapid but diminishing growth
Period of constant growth
Applying Equation 10-7, the dividend stream is discounted at Microsoft’s required
return on equity as shown below. Microsoft’s required return is derived based on the
CAPM as 9.0 percent.
V0 1 2 3 4 5
2 10
1 09
2 39
1 09
2 73
1 09
3 05
1 09
3 36
1 09
3 63
1
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
..
.
. . .
$ .
09
3 88
0 09 0 07
1
1 09
128 2
Assume that Cisco Systems pays an annual dividend of
$1.32 and has a required return of 10 percent. An analyst
estimates Cisco’s short-term dividend growth at 15 percent and predicts
dividend growth will decline to a growth rate of 6 percent over the next
12 years. Applying the H-model, as specified in Equation 10-8, the analyst’s
estimated value for Cisco is:
V0
1 32 1 06 1 32 6 0 15 0 06
0 10 0 06 52 80
272 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Dividends, Dividends—What About Capital Gains?
In their initial study of valuation concepts, investors often are bothered by the fact
that the DDM contains only dividends. Although this is the correct formulation,
many investors are sure that (1) they will not be here forever and (2) they really
want capital gains. Dividends may be nice, but buying low and selling high is won-
derful! Since so many investors are interested in capital gains, a valuation model
should seemingly contain stock price somewhere. How can price be incorporated
into the valuation model—or should it be?
How capital gains are accounted for The estimated future price is built into
the DDM—it is simply not visible. To see this, ask yourself at what price you can
expect to sell your stock at some point in the future. Assume, for example, that you
purchase the stock today and plan to hold it for three years. The price you receive
three years from now will reflect the buyer’s expectations of dividends from that
point forward (at the end of Years 4, 5, etc.). Your estimated price today of the stock,
V0
, is equal to:
V D
k
D
k
D
k
V
k
0
1 2
2
3
3
3
3
1 1 1 1 (10-9)
But V3 (the estimated value of the stock at the end of Year 3), is, in turn, equal to the
discounted value of all future dividends from Year 4 to infinity. That is,
V D
k
D
k
D
k
3
4
1
5
2
1 1 1
 (10-10)
Substituting Equation 10-10 into Equation 10-9 produces Equation 10-2, the
basic DDM. Thus, in principle, investors obtain the same estimate of value today
whether they discount:
a. Only the stream of dividends expected to be paid on the stock
or
b. A combination of dividends for some period and an expected terminal
price
Since expected price at any point in the future is a function of the dividends to
be received after that time, the estimated value today for a common stock is best
thought of as the discounted value of all future dividends.
Assume that Cisco Systems pays an annual dividend of
$1.32 and has a required return of 10 percent. An analyst
estimates Cisco’s short-term dividend growth at 15 percent and predicts
dividend growth will decline to a growth rate of 6 percent over the next
12 years. Applying the H-model, as specified in Equation 10-8, the analyst’s
estimated value for Cisco is:
V0
1 32 1 06 1 32 6 0 15 0 06
0 10 0 06 52 80
. . . . .
. . $ .
EXAMPLE 10.10
Other Discounted Cash Flow Approaches 273
The Dividend Discount Model in Practice
Many investment professionals use the DDM in various ways to estimate the intrin-
sic value of stocks. Regardless of who uses the model, or how it is used, the process
produces an “estimate” of firm value. Investors should remember this when using,
or evaluating, the output from any valuation model.
• All valuation models involve judgments and estimates because all valuation
models deal with the uncertain future.
In practice, investors may use the DDM in other forms as well. For example, rear-
ranging Equation 10-6 to solve for k, which represents the expected rate of return
on a stock (we now use the current price, P0
, instead of V0
):
k D
P g1
0
(10-11)
Equation 10-11 says that the expected return on a constant-growth stock is equal
to the dividend yield plus the expected growth rate in dividends and price, g. The
latter term can be thought of as the price change component or capital gains com-
ponent. Therefore, an investor’s expected return can be viewed as the sum of the
income component and the price change component, which together constitute
the return from a stock.
Investors can use Equation 10-11 to estimate return on a constant-growth stock,
and then compare that estimate to their required return. Recall that the required
return for a common stock, or any security, is defined as the minimum expected return
needed to induce an investor to purchase it. That is, given its risk, a security must
offer some minimum expected return before an investor is persuaded to buy it.
The CAPM provides investors with a method of calculating a required return for
a stock, an industry, or the market as a whole. If an investor’s estimated return on a
stock is greater than the required return, the stock is a buy candidate because it is
considered undervalued. Specifically,
• Buy if the investor’s estimated return > the required return
• Do not buy if the required return > investor’s estimated return
Checking Your Understanding
3. Neither the zero-growth case nor the constant-growth case shows any signs of
a present value process in their equations. How, then, can the DDM be said to
involve a present value process?
4. Assume a group of investors uses the constant-growth version of the DDM to
value GE. Are they likely to come up with different estimates of value?
Other Discounted Cash Flow Approaches
The DDM is certainly not the only DCF model used by investors and analysts; how-
ever, all DCF models rely on the same basic concepts—an estimation of future cash
flows discounted back to today using a discount rate that reflects the time value of
274 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
money and the risk involved. As noted at the outset of this discussion, the primary
differences across models relate to the cash flows and the discount rate used.
Free Cash Flow to Equity
The DCF model that relies on cash flows to equity is referred to as the Free Cash
Flow to Equity (FCFE) model. It differs from the DDM discussed previously in that
FCFE measures what a firm could pay out in dividends, rather than what it actually
does pay out.
Dividends are at times higher than FCFE and at other times lower. Note that the
FCFE variable is on a per-share basis.
Definition of free cash flow to equity FCFE is defined as the cash flow avail-
able to the firm’s owners (stockholders). It equals cash remaining after interest
and principal repayments on debt, capital expenditures (both to maintain existing
assets and provide for new assets needed for growth), and operating working capital
expenditures. It can be calculated as:
FCFE net income depreciation fixed capital expenditures
opeerating working capital expenditures net borrowing
Implementing the model To implement this model for a firm whose cash flows
are growing at a stable rate, an analyst could apply the constant-growth format dis-
cussed with the DDM. This results in the following equation:
V k g
0
next period’s expected FCFE (10-12)
where g is the expected constant-growth rate in FCFE for the company, and k is the
firm’s cost of equity capital.6
This free cash flow model is an alternative to the DDM. It may provide an esti-
mated value that is similar to that produced by the DDM or one that differs by a sig-
nificant amount. A difference will occur if the firm is paying dividends in amounts
greater than its free cash flows. The firm would have to finance these dividends out
of external capital, which could have significant consequences for the valuation of
the stock.
Free Cash Flow to the Firm
Free cash flow to the firm (FCFF) is similar to the definition of FCFE. The major
differences arise from the use of debt financing, including both the repayment of
existing debt, and the interest thereon, and the sale of new debt.
Definition of free cash flow to the firm FCFF is defined as the cash flows avail-
able to all the firm’s claimholders (common and preferred stock and bonds) after
making fixed and operating working capital expenditures.
Other Discounted Cash Flow Approaches 275
FCFF net income depreciation fixed capital expenditures
opeerating working capital expenditures interest expense t1 aax rate
or
FCFF EBIT tax rate depreciation fixed cap
,
1 iital expenditures
operating working capital expenditures
orr
FCFF FCFE interest expense tax rate net borrowing
,
1 (10-13)
When using FCFF in a DCF model, the weighted average cost of capital is used
as the discount rate. The derived value from the model represents the value of the
entire firm, that is, the value of all claimholder interests (common stock, preferred
stock, and bonds).
Implementing the model DCF models are used regularly in finance; however,
completing a full-blown valuation on a firm can be a time-consuming and tedious
process. As an example of a DCF analysis, we report an outline of the process used
by Morningstar. Morningstar’s methodology is as follows:
1. Project expected cash flows taking into account several factors such as the
company’s relative position compared to competitors, growth prospects,
management, and the attractiveness of the company’s industry.
2. Discount these estimated cash flows back to the present using an estimate of
the company’s weighted cost of capital (and taking into account such factors
as the risk of the company and its debt level).
3. To derive a firm’s equity value, adjust the present value of the firm’s expected
cash flows to account for its debt, preferred stock, cash, and off-balance sheet
assets and liabilities.
4. Divide the resulting value by the number of diluted shares outstanding, which
results in a per-share estimate of fair value of the firm’s equity (the stock price).
Recognizing that any estimation process is subject to errors, Morningstar recom-
mends a stock as a buy only if the current market price is below the fair value esti-
mate by a certain percentage (often 20 percent) in order to account for uncertainty.
Intrinsic Value and Market Price
The end objective of a DCF analysis is an estimate of intrinsic value. What does intrin-
sic value indicate? It is the estimated value of the stock today, derived from estimating
and discounting the future cash flows. How is it used? Investors and analysts specify a
relationship between the intrinsic value, V0
, of an asset and its current market price.
Specifically,
If price the asset is undervalued and should be purchasV0 , eed or held if already owned
If price the asset is overvV0 , aalued and should be avoided sold if held or possibly sold, , short
If price this implies an equilibrium in that theV0 , asset is correctly valued
Security analysis can be viewed as a search for under- or overvalued stocks. Most
investors believe that stocks are not always priced at their intrinsic values, thereby
leading to buy and sell opportunities.
276 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Using intrinsic value Always remember that the valuation process is an art and
not a science—it can never be an exact process because it involves estimates of the
future.
• When an investor calculates an intrinsic value, it is an estimate, which is sub-
ject to error.
The intelligent way to make investment decisions using intrinsic value is to
base the decision on significant differences in current price versus estimated
(calculated) value. If you estimate the value of AT&T at $30 per share, and it
is selling for $29 or $31, then it really does not matter too much. But if you do
careful analysis, and you estimate an intrinsic value for AT&T of $40 when it is
selling for $25, then you should buy because the stock is substantially under-
valued. In a similar vein, if your careful analysis indicates an intrinsic value for
AT&T of $14 when it is currently selling for $25, you should avoid the stock or
perhaps sell it short.
In practice, some analysts use a 15 percent rule in recognition of the fact that the
estimation of a security’s value is an inexact process. Thus, if the price is not at least
15 percent different from the estimated value, no action is warranted.
Uncertainty will always be the dominant feature of the environment in which
investment decisions are made. Furthermore, factors other than those that affect
cash flows are at play, including the psychology of the market. And with the advent
of the Internet, and increased investor interaction, false or misleading information
can be spread quickly and prices affected accordingly.
Checking Your Understanding
5. Does the use of models involving free cash flows make an investor’s job any
easier?
6. Is the intrinsic value of a stock a formula value or an estimated value?
The Multiplier Approach
Multiples are derived as simple ratios of firm characteristics; however, they are
widely discussed and used across finance. The most commonly used multiplier is
based on firm earnings; however, there are several alternative multipliers that are
used in investment analysis. Relative to DCF models, multipliers are popular due to
their easy calculation and straightforward interpretation.
We consider the most prominent multipliers in this section. A common feature
of all the multipliers is that market value (price) is placed in the numerator of the
ratio and a common firm characteristic in the denominator.
Earnings Multiplier (P/E Ratio)
The P/E ratio (multiple) is one of the most widely mentioned and discussed vari-
ables pertaining to a common stock and will typically appear in any report from an
analyst or an investment advisory service. As a definition, the P/E ratio is simply
the price investors are willing to pay per dollar of firm earnings. For example, a
stock priced at $100, with most recent 12-month EPS of $5, has a P/E of 20, and is
The Multiplier Approach 277
selling for a multiple of 20 times trailing 12-month (TTM) earnings. Likewise, a firm
with EPS of $2.50 that is selling for $100 has a P/E of 40 and is selling at 40 times
earnings.
• The typical P/E ratio is calculated as the current stock price divided by the
firm’s latest 12-month EPS. This P/E ratio is frequently referenced as the trail-
ing P/E because it uses trailing 12-month EPS.
The typical P/E ratio relies on historical earnings and is not particularly useful
for valuation purposes. Therefore, analysts generally use a modified version of the
ratio when deriving stock values. For valuing a stock, analysts generally make a fore-
cast of next year’s EPS and project an appropriate P/E ratio they expect is relevant
for the firm. Next year’s expected EPS, E1
, can be found by taking this year’s EPS, E0,
and compounding it one period by the expected growth rate, g.
E E g1 0 1
Previously in this chapter, we discussed three methods to obtain an estimate for
growth (g). Frequently, investors obtain estimates of next year’s EPS from security
analysts and investment advisory services such as The Value Line Investment Survey or
Standard & Poor’s Outlook.
Multiplying next year’s EPS estimate by what is thought to be an appropriate P/E
ratio produces an estimate of intrinsic value, V0
, as shown in Equation 10-14:
V E P
E
0 1
0
1 A
(10-14)
where
V
E
0
1
an estimate of the stock’s intrinsic value
next periodd’s estimated EPS
estimated appropriate P/E ratioA
P E0 1/
An appealing aspect of this approach is its simplicity—multiply two variables
together to derive an estimate of intrinsic value. However, the problem is that both
variables used in this model, next period’s EPS and the appropriate P/E ratio, are
both estimates and therefore are subject to misestimation. The appropriate P/E
ratio P E0 1/ A is the investor’s estimate of the price that investors in aggregate
should pay per dollar of estimated firm earnings.
• Remember that all valuation techniques are subject to error because they rely
on estimates.
In early 2019, Bloomberg estimated 2019 earnings for
Lowe’s at $5.12 per share. At the same time, Home Depot’s
P/E was 19.56. If an analyst believes that Home Depot’s P/E represents an
appropriate multiplier for Lowe’s. The product of the two numbers produces
a target price for Lowe’s ($5.12 × 19.56=$100.15). At the time, Lowe’s was
selling at $105. Thus, this method suggests Lowe’s was selling at a premium to
fair value.
EXAMPLE 10.11
278 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Other Multipliers
The multiplier approach is commonly applied with estimated EPS and appropriate
P/E; however, many analysts rely on alternative multipliers in deriving the intrinsic
value for a stock. The valuation procedure using these alternative multipliers works
in the same manner as the earnings multiplier approach. Specifically, the investor
estimates the relevant firm characteristic and the appropriate multiplier. By multi-
plying the two together, the investor obtains an estimate of intrinsic value, V0. The
most popular alternative multipliers include the following:
Price to Book (P/B)
The P/B ratio equals price per share divided by book value of equity per share. It is
calculated as the ratio of stock price to per-share stockholders’ equity as measured
on the balance sheet. If the value of this ratio is 1.0, the market price is equal to the
accounting (book) value. If the P/B ratio exceeds 1.0, the price exceeds the book
value (the stockholders’ contribution to the firm). Some investors view this case as
evidence that the firm has created value for stockholders. If the ratio is less than 1.0,
the stockholders’ equity contribution exceeds the market price and some would
argue the firm has destroyed value.
The relevance of the P/B ratio for investment analysis has garnered support in
empirical tests. For example, a study by Rosenberg et al.7 found that stocks with low
P/B ratios significantly outperformed the average stock. The P/B ratio received a
major boost of support in 1992 with the publication of an article by Eugene Fama and
Kenneth French. The authors found that two basic firm characteristics, size (market
value of equity) and P/B ratio, were effective in explaining subsequent stock returns.8
Price to Sales (P/S)
The P/S ratio is calculated as price per share divided by annual sales (revenue) per
share. In effect, it indicates what the market is willing to pay for a firm’s revenues.
Concepts in Action
It Takes Two to Tango
Investors place great emphasis on a company’s
EPS because of the recognized importance of
the variable in affecting stock prices. However,
remember that it takes two variables to deter-
mine stock price, EPS and the multiplier, or P/E
ratio. Consider Molson Coors Brewing, a global
brewing company. From 2013 through 2018,
revenue per share and EPS increased by 117 per-
cent and 67 percent, respectively; however, the
stock price remained at $56. Why? In 2018, inves-
tors were not willing to pay the same multiple for
Molson Coors due to concerns about shifting
consumer preferences. Specifically, Molson Coors
sold with a multiple of 15.24 in 2013, whereas the
multiple was only 11.23 in 2018.
280 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
trying to determine stocks that may be undervalued without having to say what the
stock is worth or how much it is undervalued. The appeal of the relative valuation
approach is supported by its widespread use in assessing the value of other assets
such as real estate. For example, homeowners will frequently judge the value of
their house based on the price per square foot of a neighbor’s house that recently
sold. How much did the neighbor get per square foot? Now that sounds like a price
multiple, doesn’t it?
Performing an appropriate comparative analysis across firms requires the inves-
tor to focus on firms operating in approximately the same line of business. This is
particularly true when using multiples that are not based on bottom-line firm fun-
damentals. For example, it makes little sense to compare Walmart’s P/S ratio, which
in 2018 was 0.5, to Intel’s P/S, which was 4.0. Given the different operating structure
of the two firms, such comparisons are invalid.
The relative value metrics are frequently applied to individual firms; however,
they can also be used to assess industries, sectors, and entire markets. For example,
an analyst focused on determining the appropriate sector allocation may compare
a sector’s price multiples with its historic multiples to determine how the multiple
compares to its typical valuation. If the financial sector typically has a P/B ratio of
1.6, and is now selling with a P/B of 1.4, and the analyst believes the sector’s pros-
pects are above average, the analyst may decide to overweight financials due to their
attractive relative valuation.
Information on relative valuation ratios can be easily found at sites such as Yahoo!
Finance (look under “Key Statistics” for any stock you call up by its ticker symbol).
On the Morningstar website, look under the “Valuation” section.
Price/Earnings (P/E) Ratio
Most investors intuitively realize that the P/E ratio should be higher for companies
whose earnings are expected to grow rapidly. However, how much higher is not
an easy question to answer. Furthermore, the high growth rate may be attribut-
able to several different factors, some of which are more desirable than others. For
example, rapid growth in earnings owing to strong demand for a firm’s products is
preferable to earnings growth due to temporarily favorable tax situations or liberal
accounting procedures.
As with all relative value metrics, the P/E ratio is typically used to compare com-
panies in the same industry or a company’s current P/E ratio to its past P/E ratios.
Note that while the P/E ratios for comparable companies can be evaluated, compa-
nies in different industries are expected to have different P/E ratios merely due to
differences in their operating and financial structures.
As an example, if several companies in the same industry are selling for an aver-
age P/E of 15, another company (Firm A) in this group might be given a P/E of
15; however, if Firm A is thought to be superior in terms of expected growth, a
P/E of 16 or 18 might be applied. This means that a relative valuation judgment,
or comparative judgment, is being made. In contrast, comparing Firm A to firms
in another industry that has an average P/E ratio of 10 would offer relatively little
insight.
As a general proposition, the higher the P/E ratio, the greater the market’s expec-
tation about future earnings growth. However, the market will assess the degree of
risk involved in the expected future growth of earnings. The average long-term P/E
for the S&P 500 stocks is around 16. Stocks that have very high P/E ratios, such
as 40 or higher, are very vulnerable to a market disappointment about earnings.
282 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Price/Cash Flow (P/CF) Ratio
The 2012 BofA Merrill Lynch Institutional Factor Survey indicates that P/CF is used
as a valuation metric by approximately half of the institutions surveyed. Cash
flow is viewed favorably to earnings because it is less susceptible to manipu-
lation, less likely to be negative, and is generally more stable. In addition,
cash flow addresses the issue of differences in quality of earnings across firms.
High-quality earnings are more likely to flow through to cash flows than are low-
quality earnings.
P/CF is popular among investment professionals due to its reliance on cash flow,
which is the basis of DCF analysis. When CF is measured as FCFE or FCFF, the P/CF
multiple has particularly strong theoretical support.
Enterprise Value/EBITDA (EV/EBITDA) Ratio
The EV/EBITDA ratio, also called the enterprise multiple, is less well-known than
the P/E and P/S multiple; however, the measure has gained increased recogni-
tion by practitioners over time. The empirical evidence indicates that the enterprise
multiple compares favorably with the alternative multiples in differentiating stock
returns, which likely explains its increased attention. A 2011 study by Loughran and
Wellman shows that firms with low EV/EBITDA ratios outperform firms with high
ratios by over 5 percent per year. Furthermore, the authors show that the enter-
prise multiple is superior to other price multiples in explaining subsequent stock
returns. The authors conclude that practitioner use of the enterprise multiple is
well justified.10
A recognized advantage of the enterprise multiple is that it provides a more
valid comparison when firms use different amounts of debt. In addition, relative
to other profitability measures, EBITDA is less subject to manager manipulation,
which makes the measure more appropriate for comparisons both within and across
industries.
Economic Value Added Analysis
An alternative technique for evaluating stocks is to calculate the economic value
added or EVA™.11 In effect, this measure indicates the amount by which a company’s
operating profit exceeds its total cost of capital. If this difference is positive, the
company is adding value. Its creator calls this variable “the measure of a company’s
true profitability.”
Some mutual funds now use EVA ™ analysis as the primary tool for selecting
stocks for the fund. One recommendation for investors interested in this approach
is to search for companies that are generating relatively high rates of return
on capital.
10 See Tim Loughran and Jay W. Wellman, “New Evidence on the Relation between the Enterprise Multi-
ple and Average Stock Returns,” CFA Digest, 46, no. 6 (2011): 1629–1650.
11 This term has been trademarked by Stern Stewart, a consulting firm that pioneered the use of this
concept.
Which Approach to Use? 283
In 2018, Amazon had an enterprise value to EBITDA
(EV/EBITDA) ratio of 44.9, whereas J.C. Penney Co’s
EV/EBITDA was 6.3. This dramatic difference in ratios reflects, among other
things, the difference in investor optimism about the prospects for these two
prominent retailers.
EXAMPLE 10.13
Which Approach to Use?
We have described the most often used approaches in fundamental analysis—DCF,
price multiples, and relative valuation. Which should be used?
In theory, the DCF approach is logical and supported by sound financial prin-
ciples. Conceptually, the best estimate of a company’s stock value is the present
value of the firm’s estimated cash flows. However, some analysts and investors argue
that no one can forecast dividends or cash flows into the distant future with much
accuracy. Technically, DCF models call for an estimate of all dividends/cash flows
from now to infinity, which is an impossible task. However, as we learned, infinity is
not a problem, and future dividends/cash flows can be modeled based on expected
growth rates.
Due to their ease of application and interpretation, techniques that rely on price
multiples are very popular in valuation analysis. In contrast to the DCF approaches,
these techniques can be applied to a relatively large number of firms in a fairly short
period of time. Furthermore, the price multiple approaches have broad appeal
because they are employed widely to value other types of assets. For example, the
“comparables approach” for real estate valuation relies on pricing a property based
on a comparison with comparable properties. Homeowners routinely assess their
homes’ value based on this approach.
Ethics in Investing
Truth in the Financial Markets
Investors that value stocks have a difficult
enough job without having to worry about
whether corporate disclosures are truthful or not.
In the past 30 years, a number of corporate scan-
dals have been uncovered involving manipula-
tion to make corporate earnings appear more
favorable. We need only think of Enron, World-
Com, HealthSouth, ImClone, and so forth. Lying
appears to have been a prominent feature in
multiple corporations and that has serious impli-
cations for financial markets.
The Sarbanes–Oxley Act was passed in 2002
largely as a response to these infractions. Hope-
fully, between passage of this legislation and the
trials and convictions of a number of corporate
executives, the message has been delivered that
lying about firm financials will not be tolerated. It
is unrealistic, of course, to think that these actions
will stop all false statements issued by corporate
executives. However, investors need to be able
to rely on the integrity of public disclosures by
companies if they are to have faith in the finan-
cial markets. Otherwise, they may conclude that
trying to value companies is simply a shot in the
dark, akin to gambling at a roulette wheel or slot
machine.
Bottom line? Ethical behavior, and the percep-
tion of ethical behavior, is critical to the orderly
functioning of the stock market.
284 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Regardless of the valuation approaches used, it is important to remember that
the approaches are subject to error because they rely on an uncertain future. No
matter who does the analysis, or how it is done, mistakes will be made. To increase
the robustness and accuracy of a valuation analysis, investors should apply more
than one of the valuation approaches. If different approaches produce similar esti-
mates of a stock’s intrinsic value, the investor achieves some assurance that the esti-
mate is valid. The investor can proceed with more confidence with the transaction.
In contrast, if widely differing estimates for a stock’s intrinsic value are produced by
alternative approaches, the investor should reassess the models’ inputs and make
adjustments until the valuation discrepancy can be explained.
• When estimating the intrinsic value of a security, investors should rely on more
than one valuation approach.
Bursting the Bubble on New Economy
Stocks—A Lesson in Valuation
At the end of the 1990s and into 2000, investors were caught up in a speculative
bubble involving “New Economy” stocks, such as eToys and Dr.Koop.com. These
internet companies were thought to represent the wave of the future and to be
more desirable than “Old Economy” stocks such as 3M or Procter & Gamble. There
seemed to be no upper limit as prices for these New Economy stocks were bid higher
and higher. Tremendous fortunes, mostly on paper, were made.
Because these companies involved revolutionary new technology, many investors
argued that they should be valued using revolutionary techniques because the old
methods no longer applied. As one of the leading Internet gurus at Merrill Lynch
proclaimed in early 2000, “Valuation is often not a helpful tool in determining when
to sell hyper growth stocks.” Other star analysts were talking about “usage metrics”
when discussing these stocks, which basically referred to nonfinancial metrics such
as customer loyalty, site hits, and “engaged shoppers.” Many analysts and investors
did not want to talk about EPS, cash flows, P/E ratios, and so on, and of course for
Concepts in Action
How Some Investment Advisory Services
Recommend Stocks
There are, of course, a large number of
investment advisory services and brokerage firms
that make stock recommendations. They use a
variety of valuation techniques. We review the
valuation approaches from a few well-known ser-
vices that investors can subscribe to or access in
a public library or on the Internet.
Consider Morningstar, which calculates and
reports the “fair value” for stocks based on a
DCF analysis. Standard & Poor’s, in its Outlook,
recommends stocks based on DCF analysis and
relative valuation metrics.
The Value Line Investment Survey, perhaps
the best known investment service because of
its long history and wide availability in libraries,
uses a proprietary ranking system to recom-
mend stocks, with “1” being the highest rec-
ommendation and “5” the lowest. Value Line
write-ups include earnings estimates for the
following year, earnings growth rates, a safety
rating, some information on P/E ratios, and
so forth.
Some Final Thoughts on Valuation 285
many of these companies, these variables did not exist. They had no profitability,
and in many cases little hope of profitability for the foreseeable future.
As we now know, the bubble began to burst in March 2000 and continued, with
horrific declines in 2001 and 2002. Many of the hot New Economy stocks dropped
80 percent or more, and hundreds of Internet companies went out of business.
The aggregate dollar loss in the value of investor portfolios was staggering—roughly
$4 trillion from March 2000 to March 2001 alone. The Amex Internet Index lost
60 percent of its value in 2000 and declined even further in early 2001.
By early 2001, it became apparent to all but the most obtuse that the old metrics
of valuation really do apply. To survive and succeed, companies sooner or later have
to generate cash flows and be profitable. Investors no longer believe statements
such as that of a major brokerage firm report, which argued that cash burned by
dot-com companies is “primarily an investor sentiment issue” and not a long-term
risk for the sector.12
The bottom line is that valuation standards apply to all stocks, even New Econ-
omy stocks. Revenues and profits, and all the other factors that impact cash flows,
do matter and so do price multiples.
Checking Your Understanding
7. Why is the definition of the P/E ratio often a problem when using this relative
valuation technique?
8. What did the extraordinary rise in stock valuations in the late 1990s, ending
in March 2000, demonstrate about the valuation of common stock?
Some Final Thoughts on Valuation
Valuing stocks is difficult under the best of circumstances. Judgments must be made
and variables estimated. Valuation of stocks is, and will continue to be, an art, not a
science. Errors are to be expected.
In the final analysis, stocks are worth the price investors pay for them. Eventually,
however, a stock’s price will reflect its fundamentals, as determined by cash flows
and risk, even if there may be some fairly long departures between the two.
At the peak of the technology bubble, which occurred
on March 10, 2000, Cisco had a P/E ratio of about 150,
Yahoo about 650, and JDS Uniphase about 640. One year later, the same
companies had P/E ratios of 31, 35, and 41, respectively.
EXAMPLE 10.15
Between January 1998 and March 2000, the Amex
Internet Index rose from 87 to 689. Therefore, in just
over two years, this index showed a gain of almost 700 percent. Such was the
euphoria that prevailed for New Economy stocks during this period of time.
286 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Summary
• Major approaches to valuing common stocks using fundamental analysis
include discounted cash flow (DCF) techniques, the price multiples approach,
and relative valuation techniques.
• DCF techniques attempt to estimate the intrinsic value of a stock using a pre-
sent value analysis. A stock’s intrinsic value is its estimated value or formula
value.
• The dividend discount model (DDM) is the best known DCF model and is
widely considered a foundation of stock valuation. It states that a stock’s value
today is the discounted value of all future dividends.
• The future stream of dividends from a common stock is discounted back
to the present at an appropriate discount rate (the investor’s required
return).
• To account for an infinite stream of dividends, stocks are classified by their
expected growth rate in dividends.
• If no growth is expected, the DDM reduces to a perpetuity. If two or more
growth rates are expected, a multiple-growth model must be used.
• The constant-growth version of the DDM is used most often. Using this ver-
sion, the dividend expected next period is divided by the difference between
the required return and the expected growth rate in dividends.
• The DDM is sensitive to the estimates of its inputs; therefore, investors
will calculate different prices for the same stock while using an identical
model.
• Other discounted cash flow approaches involve free cash flow to equity and
to the firm.
• The end objective of a DCF technique is an estimate of intrinsic value. Intrin-
sic value is compared to current market price to make a buy or sell decision.
• A P/E ratio can be calculated by dividing the current price by the most recent
12-month EPS.
• The earnings multiplier approach derives stock value as the product of the
firm’s forecasted 12-month EPS and the appropriate P/E ratio.
• The multiplier approach attempts to estimate intrinsic value based on
an estimated firm characteristic for the next year and an appropriate mul-
tiplier.
• The relative value concept is based on making comparisons in order to deter-
mine value. By calculating measures such as the P/E ratio, and making com-
parisons to some benchmark(s), analysts can avoid having to estimate the g
and k parameters of the DDM.
• Relative valuation techniques include P/E, P/B, P/CF, P/S, and EV/EBITDA.
Like all valuation techniques, each has its strengths and weaknesses.
286 Chapter 10 Common Stock Valuation
Summary
• Major approaches to valuing common stocks using fundamental analysis
include discounted cash flow (DCF) techniques, the price multiples approach,
and relative valuation techniques.
• DCF techniques attempt to estimate the intrinsic value of a stock using a pre-
sent value analysis. A stock’s intrinsic value is its estimated value or formula
value.
• The dividend discount model (DDM) is the best known DCF model and is
widely considered a foundation of stock valuation. It states that a stock’s value
today is the discounted value of all future dividends.
• The future stream of dividends from a common stock is discounted back
to the present at an appropriate discount rate (the investor’s required
return).
• To account for an infinite stream of dividends, stocks are classified by their
expected growth rate in dividends.
• If no growth is expected, the DDM reduces to a perpetuity. If two or more
growth rates are expected, a multiple-growth model must be used.
• The constant-growth version of the DDM is used most often. Using this ver-
sion, the dividend expected next period is divided by the difference between
the required return and the expected growth rate in dividends.
• The DDM is sensitive to the estimates of its inputs; therefore, investors
will calculate different prices for the same stock while using an identical
model.
• Other discounted cash flow approaches involve free cash flow to equity and
to the firm.
• The end objective of a DCF technique is an estimate of intrinsic value. Intrin-
sic value is compared to current market price to make a buy or sell decision.
• A P/E ratio can be calculated by dividing the current price by the most recent
12-month EPS.
• The earnings multiplier approach derives stock value as the product of the
firm’s forecasted 12-month EPS and the appropriate P/E ratio.
• The multiplier approach attempts to estimate intrinsic value based on
an estimated firm characteristic for the next year and an appropriate mul-
tiplier.
• The relative value concept is based on making comparisons in order to deter-
mine value. By calculating measures such as the P/E ratio, and making com-
parisons to some benchmark(s), analysts can avoid having to estimate the g
and k parameters of the DDM.
• Relative valuation techniques include P/E, P/B, P/CF, P/S, and EV/EBITDA.
Like all valuation techniques, each has its strengths and weaknesses.
Alphabet went public in August 2004 at $85, a price
regarded by many at the time as ridiculously high. By May
of 2005, the price had tripled. By late 2007, the price was over $600 a share
but fell below $300 in late 2008. In late 2014, it ranged from $900 to $950.
Alphabet’s erratic price behavior reflects the inherent challenge in valuing
New Economy stocks

