Common Stocks: Analysis
and Strategy
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Describe the overall impact of the
market on stocks and portfolios
• Explain the pros and cons of a
passive approach to building a
stock portfolio
• Describe the conditions that
favor the application of an active
strategy
• Critically evaluate the well-known
active equity strategies used by
investors
The Impact of the Overall Market on Stocks 295
market, almost all typical stock portfolios are significantly influenced by what hap-
pens to the market as a whole.
• Market risk is the single most important risk affecting the price movements of
common stocks. For well-diversified portfolios, market effects can account for
90 percent or more of the variability in the portfolio’s return.
Market risk abroad U.S. investors buying foreign stocks face the same issues
when it comes to market risk. Some foreign markets have performed very well, and
some have performed poorly over specified periods of time. For example, in 2014
the Chinese stock market gained more than 50 percent, whereas, in the same year,
the Russian equity market lost more than 45 percent.
Consider the performance of the T. Rowe Price Growth
and Income Fund for a recent multiyear period, as shown
in Figure 11.1. Notice how the fund’s returns and the returns for the S&P 500
track very closely. The market’s performance explains almost all of the fund’s
performance for this time period.
EXAMPLE 11.1
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Return (%)
Growth and Income return
S&P 500 return
FIGURE 11.1 Performance of T. Rowe Price Growth and Income Fund versus S&P 500, 2005–2014
Perhaps the best foreign example of the market’s impact
on investors is Japan. In the 1980s, Japan’s economy
seemed invincible, and the Nikkei stock index reflected Japan’s success as
prices rose almost without fail. The Nikkei stock index peaked at the end of
1989 at almost 39,000. By mid-1992, the index had declined below the 15,000
level, representing a staggering decline of some 60 percent. Even as recently
as January 2015, the index was trading below 17,500. As one well-known
magazine put it at the time, this was the “biggest erasure of wealth in history.”
Such is the impact of the overall market on investor wealth. From its peak in
1989 through January 2015, the Nikkei stock index lost well over 50 percent of
its value. Regardless of an investor’s prowess, virtually no portfolio invested in
Japanese stocks over this extended period could have performed well.
EXAMPLE 11.2
Building Stock Portfolios
We now consider how investors go about forming a portfolio. Investors often con-
sider the investment decision—based on objectives, constraints, and preferences—
as consisting of two steps:
1. Asset allocation
2. Security selection
Asset allocation, refers to allocating wealth to various asset classes, such as stocks,
bonds, real estate, and cash equivalents. Of course, many investors use a diversity of
asset classes, including foreign stocks, foreign bonds, real estate, commodities, and
small-capitalization stocks. And some of these categories can be further divided—
for example, foreign stocks can be allocated by region, type of economy (developed
vs. developing), and so forth.
• In many respects, asset allocation is the most important decision an investor
makes.
Having made the portfolio allocation decision, the largest part of an investor’s
success or failure is locked in.
In the rest of this chapter, we consider alternative strategies for managing the
equity portion of an investor’s portfolio. The equity component could constitute
anywhere from 0 to 100 percent of the portfolio.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Suppose you know with certainty that the stock market will rise sharply over
the next three years. Are you comfortable letting someone choose a broadly
diversified subsample of S&P 500 stocks for you?
2. If you expect real estate values to fall in the United States, what do you predict
will happen to the required return for stocks?
The Passive Strategy
A natural outcome of a belief in efficient markets is to employ some type of passive
strategy in owning and managing common stocks. If the market is highly efficient,
impounding information into prices quickly and on balance accurately, no active
strategy should be able to outperform the market on a risk-adjusted basis over a
reasonable period of time.
A passive management strategy means that the investor does not actively seek
out trading possibilities in an attempt to outperform the market. Passive strategies
Passive Management Strat-
egy A strategy whereby
investors do not actively
seek out trading possi-
bilities in an attempt to
outperform the market
Think of one investor allocating her portfolio as 90 per-
cent Nasdaq stocks and 10 percent cash equivalents
and another investor doing the opposite, 90 percent cash equivalents and
10 percent Nasdaq stocks. Now imagine the Nasdaq market declining about
75 percent, as it did in 2000–2002. Clearly, the results of these two portfolios
are vastly different regardless of the exact securities selected. Such is the
importance of asset allocation.
The Passive Strategy 297
simply aim to do as well as the market. The emphasis is on minimizing transaction
costs and time spent in managing the portfolio because any expected benefits from
active trading are likely to be less than the costs. Passive investors act as if the market
is efficient and accept the consensus estimates of return and risk, recognizing cur-
rent market price as the best estimate of a security’s value.
• Passive investment management does not try to find undervalued stocks nor
does it try to time the market. Instead, passive investing is concerned with
achieving the returns available in various market sectors at minimum costs.
An investor can simply follow a buy-and-hold strategy for whatever portfolio of
stocks is owned. Alternatively, a very effective way to employ a passive strategy with
common stocks is to invest in an index fund. We will consider each of these strate-
gies in turn.
Buy-and-Hold Strategy
A buy-and-hold strategy means an investor buys stocks and holds them until some
future time in order to meet some objective. The emphasis is on avoiding transac-
tion costs, taxable transactions, additional search costs, the time commitment to
portfolio management, and so forth. The investor believes that such a strategy will
produce results as good as alternatives that require active management. The alter-
natives incur greater search costs, taxes, and transaction costs, and inevitably, they
involve investment mistakes.
Evidence to support this view comes from Odean and Barber, who examined
60,000 investors. They found the average investor earned 15.3 percent over a five-
year period, while the most active traders (turning over about 10 percent of their
holdings each month) averaged only 10 percent.1
A buy-and-hold strategy is applicable to an investor’s portfolio, whatever its com-
position. The portfolio may be large or small, and it may emphasize various types of
stocks. Also note that an initial selection must be made to implement the strategy.
The investor must decide to buy stocks A, B, and C and not X, Y, and Z.
It is also important to recognize that the investor will, in fact, have to perform
certain functions while the buy-and-hold strategy is in existence. For example,
the investor must make an investment decision regarding the income generated
by the portfolio. In addition, a few stocks may perform so well that they dominate
the total market value of the portfolio and reduce the portfolio’s diversification. If
Investments Intuition
It is important to understand the logic of why
passive investing is a superior strategy for most
investors. Consider a capitalization-weighted
index portfolio that holds virtually all of the
stocks in the market. Each year this portfolio will
generate a return—in effect the market return.
Now consider the average dollar invested in
the market and the return it earns. Are the two
equal? No, not if the active management costs
attached to the average dollar exceed the cost
of the index portfolio, which is almost always
the case
he portfolio’s characteristics change such that it is no longer compatible with the
investor’s risk tolerance, adjustments may be required. The point is simply that even
under such a strategy, investors must still take certain actions.
Index Funds
An increasing amount of mutual fund and pension fund assets are invested in index
funds, which are considered passive equity investments. Recall from Chapter 3 that
an index fund is an unmanaged fund designed to replicate as closely as possible the
performance of a specified group of securities. Index funds arose in response to the
large body of evidence supporting the efficiency of the market, and they have grown
as evidence of the inability of mutual funds to outperform the market continues to
accumulate.
Index funds illustrated A stock-index fund may consist of all stocks in a well-
known market average such as the S&P 500 Index. No attempt is made to forecast
market movements and act accordingly or to select under- or overvalued securi-
ties. Expenses are kept to a minimum, including research costs, portfolio manag-
ers’ fees, and brokerage commissions. Index funds can be run efficiently by a
small staff.
Vanguard offers a large selection of index funds, which
allows investors to duplicate various market segments at a
very low cost. Some examples are as follows:
1. The 500 Index Portfolio consists of stocks selected to duplicate the S&P 500
and emphasizes large-capitalization stocks.
2. The Extended Market Portfolio consists of a statistically selected sample of
the Wilshire 4500 Index, which consists largely of medium- and small-
capitalization stocks.
3. The Total Stock Market Portfolio seeks to match the performance of all
(approximately 7,000) publicly traded U.S. stocks.
4. The Small-Capitalization Stock Portfolio seeks to match the performance of
the Russell 2000 Small Stock Index, consisting of 2,000 small-capitalization
stocks.
5. The U.S. Value Portfolio seeks to match the investment performance of the
S&P/BARRA Value Index, which consists of stocks selected from the S&P
500 with lower than average ratios of market price to book value.
6. The U.S. Growth Portfolio seeks to match the investment performance of the
S&P/BARRA Growth Index, which consists of stocks selected from the S&P
500 with higher than average ratios of market price to book value.
7. The Total International Portfolio covers multiple countries across Europe, the
Pacific, and emerging markets and holds over 1,500 stocks.
8. The Emerging Markets Portfolio holds stocks from companies located in
emerging markets around the world, such as Brazil, Russia, India, Taiwan,
and China.
For Vanguard funds, there are no sales or exit charges of any kind. Total
operating expenses for most of these funds is about 0.20 percent or less
annually, which is extremely low.
EXAMPLE 11.4
The Passive Strategy 299
Importance of equity index funds How important are equity index funds?
Vanguard’s 500 Index fund had over $400 billion in assets in 2018, making it one
of the largest mutual funds in the United States. And Vanguard Group is one of
the largest fund families in the United States, based primarily on the size of its
index funds. Fidelity Investments, also one of the largest fund families, traditionally
emphasized the performance of its actively managed equity funds. However, Fidelity
has increased its index offerings and has cut the total expense ratio on many of its
equity index funds to a very low rate. As noted by Morningstar, investors continue to
pour money into index funds; passive equity strategies reached nearly 45 percent of
all U.S. stock market investments at the end of 2017.2
ETFs Vanguard also offers numerous exchange-traded funds (ETFs), which can
accomplish the same objectives as an index fund. Expenses are typically even lower
than those for an index fund, and shares can be bought and sold any time the mar-
ket is open.
Tax efficiency of index funds A significant advantage of index funds is their tax
efficiency. Index funds basically buy and hold, selling shares only when necessary.
Actively managed funds, on the other hand, do more frequent trading and gener-
ate larger tax bills. Some trades may produce short-term gains taxable at ordinary
income tax rates. The tax issue really hit investors in 2001 when they paid their
taxes for 2000—many funds made large, taxable distributions based on prior years
of good returns, but the value of the fund shares themselves declined in 2000, many
quite sharply. Thus, these investors watched the value of their funds decline signifi-
cantly while paying taxes on prior gains. The same thing was repeated in 2008.
Enhanced index funds Investors can also purchase so-called “enhanced” index
funds, which are index funds that are tweaked by their managers to be a little dif-
ferent. For example, an enhanced fund tracking the S&P 500 could have the same
sector weightings as the S&P 500 but hold somewhat different stocks, perhaps with
lower P/E ratios. Or an enhanced fund can use futures and options to hold the S&P
500 and invest the remainder of the funds in bonds or other securities. The theory
is that the manager can, by tweaking the fund slightly, outperform the index. The
reality is, according to a study of 40 of these funds since their start dates, about half
of the funds outperformed their benchmark, and half did not.
The case for index funds One of the strongest cases for index funds is made by
Burton Malkiel, an economics professor at Princeton and author of the book Earn
Although an extreme example, the Boston Company
International Small-Cap fund had a 2007 distribution
equal to $23.17 per share. If, earlier that year, you had invested $100,000 in
the fund, your tax bill on this distribution would have exceeded $14,000. In
contrast, Vanguard’s S&P 500 Index fund paid no capital gains distribution
for the year.
More, Sleep Better: The Index Fund Solution. According to Malkiel, “On average, the
typical actively managed fund underperforms the index by about two percentage
points a year. And that calculation ignores the sales charges that are imposed by
some actively managed funds and the extra taxes an investor pays on funds that turn
over their portfolios rapidly.”3
According to Malkiel, there are four reasons why indexing works:
1. Securities markets are extremely efficient in digesting information.
2. Indexing is cost-efficient, with expenses much lower than actively managed
funds.
3. Actively-managed funds incur heavy trading expenses. Trading costs can
amount to 0.5 to 1.0 percent per year.
4. Indexing has a tax advantage, deferring the realization of capital gains.
Performance of index funds As for actual performance of equity index funds,
consider the following. Morningstar, the mutual fund tracking company, studied the
“success ratio” for active and passive funds taken together within each asset class,
adjusting for survivorship bias, for the five years ending in 2010. 4 Overall, passive
funds outperformed active funds. Balanced funds showed the biggest win for pas-
sive investing. International funds were the only category where active funds outper-
formed passive funds.
According to John Bogle, founder of the Vanguard Group and a leading pro-
ponent of index funds, the S&P Index will outperform 70 percent of all actively
managed equity funds over time. According to Standard and Poor’s, over a recent
five-year period, 75 percent of actively managed mutual funds failed to outperform
the market.
Table 11.1 shows the percentage of actively managed funds that underper-
formed their benchmark for the 15-year period ending in 2010. These results
are adjusted for survivorship bias. As Table 11.1 shows, for large-cap actively
managed growth funds, 79 percent underperformed their benchmark. Notice
the astounding results for medium-capitalization funds—96, 94, and 97 percent
for the value, blend, and growth categories, respectively, underperformed their
benchmarks.
Percentage of Actively Managed Funds Underperforming
Their Benchmarks for the 15-Year Period Ending in 2010
Small Medium Large
Value (%) 82 96 63
Blend 93 94 84
Growth 83 97 79
Source: Adapted from Christopher B. Philips, “The Case for Indexing,” Vanguard Research,
February 2011, p. 15, Figure 10.
TABLE 11.1
3 Burton Malkiel, “The Case for Index Funds,” Mutual Funds Magazine (February 1999): p. 72. This entire
discussion involving Malkiel is based on this article, pp. 72–75.
4 Russel Kinnel, “Index vs. Active: What the Data Say,” Morningstar online (September 12, 2011).
The Active Strategy 301
Checking Your Understanding
3. Your financial advisor urges you to adopt a passive investing strategy. You
decide to hold a broadly diversified portfolio of stocks. Your advisor argues
that you are now protected from the collateral damage to a portfolio that
occurs when an overvalued sector of the market declines. Agree or disagree
and explain your reasoning.
The Active Strategy
Most of the techniques discussed in this text involve an active approach to invest-
ing. In the area of common stocks, the use of valuation models to value and select
stocks indicates that investors are analyzing and valuing stocks in an attempt to
improve their performance relative to some benchmark such as a market index.
They assume or expect the benefits to be greater than the costs.
An active management strategy assumes that investors possess some advantage
relative to other market participants. Such advantages could include superior ana-
lytical or judgment skills, superior information, or the ability or willingness to do
what other investors, particularly institutions, are unable to do. For example, many
large institutional investors cannot take positions in very small companies, leaving
this field for individual investors. Furthermore, individuals are not required to own
diversified portfolios and are typically not prohibited from short sales or margin
trading as are some institutions.
Most investors still favor an active approach to common stock selection and
management, despite the accumulating evidence from efficient market studies and
the published performance results of institutional investors. The reason for this is
obvious—the potential rewards are very large, and many investors feel confident
that they can achieve such rewards even if other investors cannot. We discuss three
components of the active approach to stock selection and management.
• Security selectionActive approach
• Sector analysis
• Market timing
Security Selection
• The most traditional and popular form of active strategies is the selection of
individual stocks believed to offer superior “risk-return” characteristics.
Stocks typically are selected using fundamental security analysis, but technical
analysis is also used.5 Many investors believe that they possess the requisite skill,
patience, and ability to identify undervalued stocks.
Active Management Strat-
egy A strategy designed to
provide additional returns
by trading activities
5 Technical analysis is discussed in Chapter 16.
302 Chapter 11 Common Stocks: Analysis and Strategy
A key feature of the investment environment is the uncertainty that surrounds
investing decisions. Most stock pickers recognize the pervasiveness of this uncer-
tainty and protect themselves accordingly by diversifying. Therefore, the standard
assumption of rational, intelligent investors who select stocks to buy and sell is that
such selections will be part of a diversified portfolio.
The justification for stock selection To gain some appreciation for the impor-
tance of stock selection, consider the cross-sectional variation in common stock
returns. McEnally and Todd found that investors who successfully confined selec-
tion to stocks in the highest quartile would have largely avoided losing years, and
even in bad years the losses were modest. 6 Conversely, for the bottom quarter,
results were negative about 55 percent of the time, and about 25 percent of the
time, even the best stocks lost money despite generally favorable market condi-
tions. The implication is that “For those who attempt to pick stocks, the rewards
can be very high, but the risk and negative consequences of poor selection are
substantial.”
The best performing industry in 2018 was the retail industry, which returned 8.6
percent. In contrast, the worst performing industry was the mining industry, which
reported a return of −28.8 percent. With respect to individual stocks, for 2018,
Advanced Micro Devices appreciated by 79.6 percent, whereas Coty Inc. dropped by
67.0 percent. Obviously, investors able to avoid poor performing stocks and indus-
tries, while accumulating strong performers can achieve remarkable portfolio per-
formance over time.
The importance of stock selection How important is stock selection in the over-
all investment process? As Peter Lynch, former head of Fidelity’s Magellan Fund,
states: “If it’s a choice between investing in a good company in a great industry, or a
great company in a lousy industry, I’ll take the great company in the lousy industry
any day.” Most active investors, are, to various degrees, stock selectors. The major-
ity of investment advice is geared to the selection of stocks thought to be attractive
candidates at the time.
The importance of earnings per share (EPS) in stock selection Investors
should carefully study a company’s earnings, and estimates of earnings, before
investing. Earnings are critical in determining stock prices, and what really mat-
ters is a company’s expected earnings (what is referred to on Wall Street as earnings
estimates). Three prominent investment service firms that report consensus
earnings forecasts include I/B/E/S, Thomson First Call, and Zacks Investment
Research. These services typically track the earnings expectations of thousands of
equity analysts.
• The primary emphasis in fundamental security analysis is on expected EPS.
Considerable effort is devoted by investors and investment advisory services to
forecasting EPS.
Growth stocks and value stocks Value stocks have prices that are considered
“cheap” relative to earnings, book value, and other measures thought indicative of
The Active Strategy 303
value. According to Zacks, value stocks (1) are believed to trade at a discount to their
true value, (2) have relatively high dividend yields, and (3) have relatively low price
multiples, such as P/E and P/B. Value investing is generally consistent with a con-
trarian strategy, whereby the investor chooses stocks that are considered out of favor.
Growth stocks, on the other hand, emphasize expectations about future growth
in earnings. Zacks identifies the following three features of growth stocks. First, they
typically grow earnings/revenues faster than the industry or market. Second, they
rarely pay dividends and instead prefer to reinvest excess cash. Third, they usually
have relatively high price multiples such as P/E and P/B ratios. Growth investing is
generally consistent with a momentum approach whereby investors choose stocks
with recent strong performance.
Over the last 60 years, value stocks have outperformed growth stocks by an aver-
age of about five percent per year. This outperformance contributed to the wide-
spread recognition of the value effect or value anomaly and was instrumental in
making fortunes for recognized value investors such as Warren Buffett and John
Neff. Figure 11.2 illustrates the value premium, which is derived as the return on
the value portfolio minus the return on the growth portfolio, over the period from
2003 through 2014. During this 12-year period, the value premium averaged only
1.4 percent.
As indicated in Figure 11.2, the value premium has been positive in the majority
of recent years but has deviated substantially. For example, the highest premium
during the 12 years was 14.5 percent in 2006, whereas the lowest premium was
−12.2 percent the following year. Clearly, the value premium is not something that
investors should count on as a reliable outcome.
• Value investing is based on taking a long-term view and often involves a con-
trarian approach, that is, going against the consensus.
Security analysts and stock selection Stocks are, of course, selected by both
individual investors and institutional investors. Rather than do their own security
analysis, individual investors often rely on the recommendations of professionals.
An important part of the institutional side of stock selection is the role of the secu-
rity analyst in the investment process.
Growth Stocks Stocks that
are considered to have
strong prospects for future
growth
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Return (%)
Value premium
FIGURE 11.2 Annual value premium, 2003–2014
Source: The return premiums plotted in the figure are obtained from the Kenneth French website, http://mba.tuck.
dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.htmlis.
304 Chapter 11 Common Stocks: Analysis and Strategy
“Wall Street” analysts, called sell-side analysts, cover the actively traded stocks in
the United States (some stocks are heavily covered, others are covered by only one
or two analysts, and some stocks are not covered at all). Their research reports are
used to “sell” an idea to investors, both individuals and institutions. Some of these
analysts work for firms such as Value Line and Standard and Poor’s, which provide
“independent” research and recommendations to investors; that is, these companies
do not have brokerage operations to support. On the other hand, buy-side analysts
are employed by money management firms (such as pension funds, mutual funds,
and investment advisers). These analysts search for attractively priced equities for
their firms to buy, and their research is typically available only to their employers.7
A typical analyst report contains a description of the company’s business, how
the analyst expects the company to perform, an estimate of firm value, revenue esti-
mates, earnings estimates, a price target for the year ahead, and recommendations
as to buy, hold, or sell. The central focus of the analysts’ job is to forecast a specific
company’s price, growth rate, or return.
In preparing their reports, the major sources of information used by analysts
are presentations from the firms’ top management, annual reports, and Form 10-K
reports, which are filed with the SEC. According to surveys of analysts, they consist-
ently emphasize the long term over the short term. Variables of major importance
in their analysis include expected changes in earnings per share, expected return
on equity (ROE), and industry outlook.
StarMine Corporation examined the impact that analysts have on stock prices
when they change their recommendations. The StarMine analysis showed that on
the day of an analyst upgrade, stocks rose an average of 2.1 percent; whereas, follow-
ing a downgrade, stocks declined an average of 5.4 percent. Downgrades are more
prominent because investors who trade stocks are more concerned with bad news.
The substantial price moves associated with upgrades and downgrades indicate that
analysts provide valuable information to the financial markets.
Potential problems with security analysts Regardless of the effort expended
by analysts, investors should be cautious in accepting analysts’ forecasts and recom-
mendations. For example, analyst forecasts of long-term EPS are typically overly
optimistic. In contrast, analyst forecasts of near-term EPS, on average, understate
next quarter’s actual EPS. FactSet reports that as of early 2015, the five-year average
for the number of S&P 500 companies that beat the consensus analyst EPS estimate
was 73 percent. If earnings forecasts are unbiased, shouldn’t that be approximately
50 percent?
Much like obstetricians forecasting birth dates, analysts have been successful
in convincing the public that their incorrect earnings forecasts are not errors but
instead earnings “misses” or “beats” by the underlying firms. Interestingly, making
overly optimistic long-term EPS growth estimates, while simultaneously underesti-
mating near-term EPS, tends to promote positive investor attitudes toward stocks.
What investor doesn’t feel better about their stocks having strong projected long-
term EPS growth and beating their EPS estimates?
In doing their job of analyzing and recommending companies, analysts suppos-
edly present their recommendations in the forms “buy,” “hold,” and “sell.” However,
until very recently, investors who receive brokerage reports typically saw recommen-
dations for specific companies as either “buy” or “hold” or “speculative hold” or
other words such as these.
The Active Strategy 305
• Traditionally, security analysts were under great pressure to avoid the word
“sell.” Analysts often faced significant pressure from their own firms seeking to
be the underwriter on lucrative stock and bond underwritings.
Brokerage firms wanted their analysts to support stocks by making positive state-
ments in the hopes of winning investment banking business. By 2000–2001, security
analysts were being heavily criticized for these conflicts of interest, and rightly so.
As of 2008, only about 6 percent of analyst recommendations were sell recom-
mendations; however, the larger investment firms had more sell ratings. In 2008,
Merrill Lynch began requiring its analysts to assign at least 20 percent of the stocks
it follows the lowest rating used by Merrill Lynch, underperform.8
Figure 11.3 shows an example of the number of analyst recommendations by type
of recommendation—buy, hold, or sell—for the S&P 500 stocks. Out of a total of
almost 11,000 recommendations, only 530 were sell/underperform.
What about analysts’ forecasts of EPS for foreign firms? According to a 2011 anal-
ysis, analysts employed by investment banks around the world rated almost every
Chinese stock they covered a “buy” by a ratio of 19 buy recommendations for every
one sell recommendation.9 Reasons given for this optimism by sell-side analysts are
strong pressures to believe in the “China cannot fail” story, the desire for investment
banking business, and the desire to obtain better access to Chinese companies and
their executives. Thus, across the globe, it would appear that analysts’ EPS forecasts
are like the fictional Lake Wobegon, where all the children are considered above
average.
Ethics in Investing
Should Brokers and Analysts Be Fined for
Rumors?
In early 2005, the NASD announced it had fined
a stock analyst $75,000 for spreading a rumor
about a small semiconductor manufacturer. It
was said to be a “sensational negative rumor,”
and the stock fell although the company publicly
denied the rumor. The company complained
to the NASD, which, after investigation, levied
the fine.
The NASD alleged that the broker/analyst in
this situation did not adequately investigate to
determine if there was a reasonable basis for the
rumor. Obviously, the question arises as to what is
“adequate.” If the rumor had simply been fabri-
cated or the analyst spread it knowing it was false,
there would be clear grounds for a fine. In this
case, however, the charge was that the analyst
simply circulated it. Analysts and brokers are not
fined for passing on rumors thought to come from
a reliable source or if the rumor is qualified by
saying that the accuracy of the rumor could be
in serious doubt. Furthermore, rumors are a daily
part of trading stocks. Many trades are initiated
on the basis of rumors or limited information, only
later obtaining the actual facts. What is ethical in
situations like this, and who determines when an
analyst crosses the line
306 Chapter 11 Common Stocks: Analysis and Strategy
Using analysts’ output effectively Investors should be wary of analysts’ forecasts
and buy recommendations but should not disregard the information they produce.
Despite all the criticism leveled at analysts, investors can use analysts’ reports and
information intelligently.
Many analysts are quite good at analyzing industries and identifying trends in
companies, industries, and the economy. They compile useful information and
often have good insights as to future prospects because they have followed the indus-
tries and companies for years. Investors should use this information in conjunction
with their own analysis. On the other hand, they should be skeptical of such items
as long-term earnings estimates because analysts are typically overly optimistic, and
they should be very skeptical about price targets.
0
Buy/outperform
Hold
Sell/underperform
1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000
Number of recommendations
5,000 6,000 7,000
FIGURE 11.3 Number of analyst recommendations by type for the S&P 500 stocks
Source: Jack Hough, “How to Profit from Analysts’ Stock Recommendations,” The Wall Street Journal, January 14–15,
p. B7.
Some Practical Advice
Can You Believe Security Analysts?
When the market peaked in 2000, only 1 percent
of analysts’ recommendations were “sell.” The
collapse of Enron in 2001 was a major scandal
on Wall Street. The company was reporting fraud-
ulent earnings and eventually collapsed in a
spectacular bankruptcy. Immediately prior to the
collapse, analysts were recommending Enron to
investors as a “buy” or at least a “hold.”
The years following the Enron scandal suppos-
edly saw analysts’ recommendations become
more objective. But how much really changed?
At the peak of the housing boom (2005–2006),
analysts were very positive about the house
building industry. According to one study of Wall
Street analyst ratings based on 1,500 companies,
only 0.08 percent of the recommendations were
“sell” recommendations and only 4.2 percent
were “weak hold” recommendations. Clearly, out
of so many companies, it is impossible to believe
there were almost no sell candidates. Instead,
it appears analysts are doing what they have
always done, being optimistic in their recommen-
dations and going out of their way not to find sell
candidates. Investors should be extremely cau-
tious when reviewing sell-side analyst recommen-
dations. Instead, they should rely on independent
sources for recommendations.
The Active Strategy 307
It is important to note that investors need not rely on Wall Street analysts for their
recommendations and analysis. Some firms employ independent analysts to study
companies, and the information from these firms is available to investors, either by
paid subscription or free in a library or even free on a website. Three outstanding
sources of independent information are the following:
• The Value Line Investment Survey is one of the most famous sources of stock
information. Value Line has ranked stocks into five categories since 1965. It is
available in printed and electronic format by subscription and widely available
in libraries.
• Standard and Poor’s Outlook is available by subscription and at libraries. A very
informative weekly source of information.
• Morningstar, although best known for mutual funds, now analyzes and recom-
mends individual stocks.
Rotation Strategies
As the name implies, a rotation strategy is executed by an investment manager
rotating out of certain asset classes while rotating into other asset classes. Imple-
menting a rotation strategy requires the investor to rely on a variable, or set of
variables, to serve as a signal of when to initiate the rotation. For many investors,
past performance serves as the indicator variable, whereby the investor rotates into
the best performing securities and out of the worst performers. The Wall Street Jour-
nal columnist Jason Zweig contends that “It is well-known that investors chase past
performance, buying whatever has just made the most money for other people.”
According to the authors of the book, Invest with the Fed, “Implementing a rotation
strategy involves moving into the best performing sectors and out of the worst per-
formers; the tricky part, of course, is to make the move prior to the sector becoming
the best or worst performer.” 10
One type of rotation strategy involves rotating across equities grouped by
industry/sector and is frequently identified as a sector rotation strategy. This strat-
egy involves shifting sector weights in the portfolio in order to take advantage of
those sectors that are expected to do relatively better and avoid or deemphasize
those sectors that are expected to do relatively worse. Investors employing a sector
rotation strategy are betting that particular sectors will repeat their price perfor-
mance relative to the current economic, business, or monetary conditions.
An investor could think of larger groups as the relevant sectors, shifting between
cyclical, defensive, growth, and value stocks. For example, a common approach is
to divide stocks into four broad sectors: interest-sensitive, consumer durable, capital
goods, and defensive stocks. Each of these sectors is expected to perform differently
during the various phases of the business and credit cycles. For example, interest-
sensitive stocks are expected to be adversely impacted during periods of high inter-
est rates and such periods tend to occur at the latter stages of the business cycle. As
interest rates decline, the earnings of companies in this sector—mortgage REITs,
utilities, and residential construction firms—should improve.
Defensive stocks include companies such as food production, soft drinks, beer,
pharmaceuticals, and utilities that often are not hurt as badly during the down-
side of the business cycle. These firms offer services and produce products that are
10 See Robert Johnson, Gerald Jensen, and Luis Garcia-Feijoo, Invest with the Fed: Maximizing Portfolio
Performance by Following Federal Reserve Policy (McGraw-Hill Inc., 2015).
308 Chapter 11 Common Stocks: Analysis and Strategy
considered to be necessities by most consumers. As the economy worsens and more
problems are foreseen, investors may move into these stocks for investment protec-
tion. These stocks often do well during late phases of a business cycle.
An effective sector rotation strategy depends heavily on an accurate assessment of
current economic conditions. A knowledge and understanding of the phases of the
business cycle are important, as is an understanding of political environments, mon-
etary conditions, international linkages among economies, and credit conditions.
Investors search for indicators that successfully identify when to shift a portfolio to
a more aggressive or defensive position.
Relative to investing in a market index, sector bets are narrow bets that can
result in big gains or big losses. Investors should not generally expect year-to-year
continuity in results. Nevertheless, a 2008 study using 33 years of equity returns
strongly suggests that a simple sector rotation strategy based on Federal Reserve
monetary policy “could have been used to significantly improve risk-adjusted port-
folio performance.”11
• Sector investing is subject to greater risks than investing in the overall market.
As for information, Standard and Poor’s Industry Surveys is published weekly and
contains detailed data on more than 50 industry groups. Investor’s Business Daily,
published five days a week, ranks almost 200 industry groups with each issue. Each
weekly issue of Bloomberg Business Week reports best and worst performing sectors
for the last month and the last 12 months, as well as information on sector mutual
funds.
Indirect investing in sectors Investors can pursue a sector investing approach
using sector mutual funds or sector ETFs. There are hundreds of sector funds and
sector ETFs available to investors. For example, both Vanguard and State Street
offer sector ETFs for the nine major sectors of the stock market: consumer dis-
cretionary, consumer staples, energy, financials, healthcare, industrials, technology,
materials, and utilities. The dramatic increase in the number and type of sector
fund has made sector rotation strategies much easier to implement and manage,
which has greatly expanded the strategy’s popularity.
It is also possible to construct a balanced portfolio consisting solely of sector
funds or ETFs. For example, an investor could include technology, real estate,
financial, natural resource, consumer discretionary, and utility stocks with six sector
funds or ETFs.
Industry momentum and sector investing Sector funds are particularly popu-
lar with momentum traders. Momentum in stock returns refers to the tendency
of stocks that have performed well (poorly) recently to continue to perform well
(poorly). Academic research has uncovered an intermediate (3- to 12-month)
momentum in U.S. stock returns and attributed it, at least partially, to an industry
effect. This suggests that recent strong (weak) industry performance is followed by
strong (weak) industry performance over subsequent months.
Based on Fidelity Select Portfolio sector funds, O’Neal found evidence sup-
porting the view that it was possible to exploit the industry momentum pattern
in stock returns. In particular, he found a difference of 8.6 percent in the annual
The Active Strategy 309
returns between the high- and low-momentum portfolios that were formed from
the sector funds. 12
Market Timing
Market timers attempt to earn excess returns by varying the percentage of portfolio
assets in equity securities. One has only to observe a chart of stock prices over time
to appreciate the profit potential of being in the stock market at the right times and
being out of the market at bad times. For example, if you could have recognized
a market peak in Spring 2008 and sold your equities, you would have avoided a
disaster. Similarly, if you could have recognized the market bottom in March 2009
and bought equities, you could have realized a 60 percent return on your money. If,
if, if—if you could see your college exams before you take them, you undoubtedly
would do much better on them.
When equities are expected to do well, timers shift from cash equivalents
such as money market funds to common stocks. When equities are expected to
do poorly, the opposite occurs. Alternatively, timers could increase the betas of
their portfolios when the market is expected to rise or decrease the betas of their
portfolio when the market is expected to fall. One important factor affecting
the success of a market timing strategy is the amount of brokerage commissions
and taxes paid with such a strategy as opposed to those paid with a buy-and-
hold strategy.
Some believe that the popularity of market timing follows a cycle of its own. If the
market is strongly up, market timing falls into disrepute, and buying and holding
is the popular strategy. Following a severe market decline, however, market timing
comes into vogue, and the buy-and-hold strategy is not as popular.
The controversy surrounding market timing Like many issues in the invest-
ing arena, the subject of market timing is controversial. Can some investors
regularly time the market effectively enough to provide excess returns on a risk-
adjusted basis?
Much of the empirical evidence on market timing comes from studies of mutual
funds. A basic issue is whether fund managers increase the beta of their portfolios
when they anticipate a rising market and reduce the beta when they anticipate a
declining market. Several studies found no evidence that funds were able to time
market changes and change their risk levels in response.
Chang and Lewellen examined the performance of mutual funds and found
little evidence of any market timing ability. Furthermore, the average estimated
down-market beta turned out to be slightly higher than the average estimated
upmarket beta. Overall, this study supported the conclusion that mutual funds
do not outperform a passive investment strategy. Henriksson found that mutual
fund managers are not able to successfully employ strategies involving market
timing. Moreover, these managers were also not successful with timing large mar-
ket changes. 13
12 Edward S. O’Neal, “Industry Momentum and Sector Mutual Funds,” Financial Analysts Journal, 58, no.
4 (July/August 2000): 37–49.
13 Eric Chang and Wilbur Lewellen, “Market Timing and Mutual Fund Investment Performance,”
Journal of Business, 57, no. 1, part 1 (January 1984): 57–72. Roy D. Henriksson, “Market Timing and
Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Business, 57, no. 1, part 1 (January
1984): 73–96.
310 Chapter 11 Common Stocks: Analysis and Strategy
A study of market timing using large-cap stocks versus T-bills concluded, “the
investor would need to have a predictive accuracy, on average, of greater than
66 percent to outperform choices made from simply flipping a coin. As the holding
period increases, the needed accuracy also increases.”14 The Hulbert Financial Digest
tracks many market timing newsletters and consistently finds that approximately
80 percent of them underperform the market indexes. Mark Hulbert is quoted as
saying, “It’s such a constant it’s like, end of story, might as well go home.”15
Why market timing is risky Investors who miss only a few key months of being
invested in the market may suffer significantly. For example, over a recent 40-year
period, investors who missed the 34 best months for stocks would have seen an ini-
tial $1,000 investment grow to only $4,492 instead of $86,650. Even Treasury bills
would have been a better alternative in this situation. According to another esti-
mate, as Figure 11.4 shows, for the period 1980–2000 the value of $1.00 invested in
the S&P 500 would have grown to $18.41. However, taking out the best 15 months of
S&P performance, $1.00 would have grown to only $4.73. As one magazine summed
up these statistics, “You gotta be in it, to win it.”16
• Considerable research now suggests that the biggest risk of market timing is
that investors will not be in the market at critical times, thereby significantly
reducing their overall returns.
Some Practical Advice
The available evidence clearly suggests market
timing will not work for most investors. Not only
must you decide when to get out of stocks,
you must also decide when to get back in.
And, being out of the market for relatively short
periods can dramatically lower average returns.
Charles Ellis, in his well-known book about why
investors are not likely to outperform the market,
summed it up well: “Market timing is a wicked
idea. Don’t try it—ever.” 17 Finally, consider this
quote from Warren Buffett, arguably the most
successful investor in the world: “Investors need
to avoid the negatives of buying fads, crummy
companies, and timing the market.”18
Checking Your Understanding
4. What causes the conflicts of interest for security analysts?
5. How can investors be confident that security analysis is profitable year after year?
6. State two reasons why market timing will likely not be a successful strategy.
Rational Markets and Active Strategies
One of the most significant developments in recent years is the proposition that
securities markets are efficient and that rational asset pricing models predominate.
Under this scenario, investors are assumed to make rational, informed decisions on
the basis of the best available information. In a rational market, security prices accu-
rately reflect investor expectations about future cash flows. Much evidence exists to
support the basic concepts of market efficiency and rational asset pricing.
If the stock market is efficient, prices reflect their fair economic value. Even if
this is not strictly true, prices may reflect their approximate fair value after trans-
action costs are taken into account, a condition known as economic efficiency. If
stock prices depart only slightly from their fair economic value, investors should not
employ trading strategies designed to “beat the market” by identifying undervalued
stocks, nor should they attempt to time the market. Sector rotation also will be
unsuccessful on average in a highly efficient market.
Efficient market proponents often argue that less time should be devoted to the
analysis of securities for possible inclusion in a portfolio, and more to such considera-
tions as reducing taxes and transaction costs and maintaining the chosen portfolio risk
level. Because a person’s beliefs about market efficiency have a significant impact on the
type of stock strategy implemented, we consider market efficiency in the next chapter.
A Simple Strategy: The Coffeehouse
Portfolio
An appropriate way to conclude our discussion of common stock strategies is to
consider one of the simplest strategies an investor can follow. Short of simply invest-
ing 100 percent in one fund, one of the simplest strategies is the “Coffeehouse
Some Practical Advice
The available evidence clearly suggests market
timing will not work for most investors. Not only
must you decide when to get out of stocks,
you must also decide when to get back in.
And, being out of the market for relatively short
periods can dramatically lower average returns.
Charles Ellis, in his well-known book about why
investors are not likely to outperform the market,
summed it up well: “Market timing is a wicked
idea. Don’t try it—ever.” 17 Finally, consider this
quote from Warren Buffett, arguably the most
successful investor in the world: “Investors need
to avoid the negatives of buying fads, crummy
companies, and timing the market.”18
17 Charles Ellis, Winning the Loser’s Game, 4th ed. (McGraw-Hill, 2002), p. 10.
18 Andy Serwer, “The Oracle of Everything,” Fortune (November 11, 2002): 71.
312 Chapter 11 Common Stocks: Analysis and Strategy
portfolio,” created by an ex-Smith Barney broker named Bill Schultheis.19 It involves
no trading, no rebalancing, no security analysis, and no strategizing.
Forty percent of the portfolio is allocated to bonds and 60 percent to equity.
This can be accomplished with index funds or ETFs. For example, for the 60
percent equity portion, put 10 percent in the S&P 500, 10 percent in large-cap
value stocks, 10 percent in small-cap stocks, 10 percent in small-cap value stocks,
10 percent in international stocks, and 10 percent in REITs. Over the five-year
period starting with the bear market of 2000–2002, this portfolio outperformed
the indexes with no additional costs or effort. Over the 10-year period ending in
2014, according to the Coffeehouse website, the annualized return was 6.45 per-
cent. Although not a direct comparison because the Coffeehouse portfolio holds
bonds, small stocks, and so on, the S&P 500 annual return for these 10 years was
9.37 percent.
Such a portfolio typically does not outperform the market when it is booming,
which is why it was laughed at in 1999 at the height of the dotcom frenzy. However,
in 2008 when the market lost 36.55 percent, the Coffeehouse portfolio dropped by
only 20.21 percent. Over time things have a way of evening out, as the performance
of the Coffeehouse portfolio demonstrates. Once again, it illustrates the impor-
tance of good asset allocation.
Summary
• Market risk is the single most important risk affecting common stocks.
• For well-diversified portfolios, market effects account for 90 percent or more
of the variability in the portfolio’s return.
• The required return for a common stock, or any security, is defined as the
minimum expected return needed to induce an investor to purchase the
stock.
• The required return for any investment opportunity can be expressed as the
sum of the risk-free return and a risk premium.
• The tradeoff between required return and risk is viewed as linear and
upward sloping, which means that the required return increases as risk
increases.
• If the market is totally efficient, no active strategy will beat the market on a
risk-adjusted basis, and, therefore, a passive strategy is superior.
• Passive strategies include buy and hold and the use of index funds.
• Pursuit of an active strategy assumes that investors possess some advantage
relative to other market participants.
• Active strategies include stock selection, rotation strategies, and market
timing.
• The most important active strategy is stock selection. A rotation strategy is a
variation of this approach.
• Security analysts play a large role in providing information relevant to stock
valuation and selection. Some of their output has been heavily criticized
because of conflicts of interest. Other parts of their output can be of real value
to investors doing security analysis.
19 See Bill Schultheis, The New Coffeehouse Investor: How to Build Wealth, Ignore Wall Street, and Get on With
Your Life, 2009.
Computational Problems 313
Questions
11.1 What impact does the market have on well-
diversified portfolios? What does this suggest about
the performance of mutual funds?
11.2 How does an investor reconcile the large vari-
ability in stock returns, and the big drops that have
occurred, with taking a prudent position in owning
a portfolio of financial assets?
11.3 Given the drastic drop in the price of Japanese
stocks in the past, how can U.S. investors justify own-
ing foreign stocks?
11.4 Outline the rationale for passive strategies.
11.5 What is the relation between passive investing and
the efficient market concept?
11.6 Why are actively managed mutual funds likely to be
tax inefficient?
11.7 Can a standard index mutual fund outperform its
index?
11.8 Describe three active strategies involving common
stocks.
11.9 What are the major sources of information used by
security analysts in evaluating common stocks?
11.10 How does the cross-sectional variation in common
stock returns relate to the issue of stock selection?
11.11 What is meant by a rotation strategy? What is
the key input in implementing effective rotation
strategies?
11.12 What does the evidence cited on market timing sug-
gest about the likelihood of success in this area?
11.13 What does it mean to say that investors at large
brokerage firms now have access to independent
research when buying securities?
11.14 Name three independent sources of information
investors can use in doing their own research on
stocks.
11.15 What is the basic idea behind the efficient market
hypothesis?
11.16 What are the implications of the efficient market hy-
pothesis to both stock selectors and market timers?
11.17 If more investors became passive investors, how
would that affect investment companies?
11.18 How should active investors determine if their efforts
are worth the cost relative to passive investing?
11.19 Vanguard’s S&P 500 Index fund consistently out-
performs Morgan Stanley’s S&P 500 Index fund,
although both hold the same portfolio of stocks.
Ignoring sales charges, what is the obvious reason for
the underperformance of the Morgan Stanley fund?
11.20 Vanguard’s Information Technology Fund (VITAX)
outperformed Vanguard’s S&P 500 Index fund dur-
ing the period 2014–2018, although it had a higher
operating expense ratio. What is the reason for this
outperformance?
Problems
11.1 The average equity mutual fund charges about 1.5
percent annually as an operating expense ratio.
Assuming that the average fund earns 11 percent on
a gross basis over a 20-year period, determine how
much $10,000 would grow to on a net basis after 20
years.
11.2 Go to www.morningstar.com and look at Morgan
Stanley’s S&P 500 “A” shares (symbol = SPIAX).
Assuming you invest $10,000 in these shares, how
much would your account be worth on the first day
after the deduction of the load charge?
11.3 Suppose you had bought Putnam’s Multi-Cap
Growth “A” shares (symbol = PNOPX) and owned
it for the years 2007–2011. Calculate the geometric
mean annual return for this five-year period. Use
Morningstar to determine the average annual return
for these five years.
Computational Problems
11.1 You can buy Vanguard’s S&P 500 fund with an
annual operating expense of 0.18 percent, or you
can buy Morgan Stanley’s S&P 500 fund with an
annual operating expense of 1.40 percent. Given
S&P 500 returns for 2007–2011 of 5.49, 36.6, 26.46,
15.06, and 2.1, respectively, determine how much
$10,000 invested in each fund on January 1, 2007,
would be worth on December 31, 2011.
• Market timing is not a likely success story for investors. Missing a relatively few
days or months in the market can lower average returns dramatically.
• The efficient market hypothesis, which states that current stock prices reflect
information quickly and without bias, has implications for all stock investors.
