Market Efficiency
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Discuss the efficient market hypo-
thesis (EMH) and explain its signifi-
cance to investors.
• Evaluate how the EMH is tested and
what the evidence has shown.
• Recognize the anomalies (excep-
tions to market efficiency) that
have been put forward.
• Explain the behavioral finance
arguments being made today.
316 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
approach the study of market efficiency with an open mind. The fact that some
well-known market observers and participants reject or disparage market efficiency
does not reduce its validity. Much evidence exists to support market efficiency,
regardless of the counterarguments and the rise in prominence of behavioral
finance. The intelligent approach for investors, therefore, is to learn about the
potential implications that market efficiency and behavioral finance have for
investment management.
The Concept of an Efficient Market
What Is an Efficient Market?
Investors determine stock prices on the basis of the expected cash flows to be
received from a stock and the risk involved. Rational investors use all the informa-
tion they have available or can reasonably obtain. This information set consists of
both known information and beliefs about the future (i.e., information that can
reasonably be inferred).
• Information is the key to the determination of stock prices and, therefore, is
the central issue of the efficient market concept.
An efficient market is defined as one in which the prices of all securities quickly
and fully reflect all available relevant information:
• In an efficient market, the price of a security incorporates all relevant
information.
• In an efficient market, security prices reflect available information so as to
offer an expected return consistent with the level of risk.
The efficient market concept postulates that investors assimilate all relevant
information into prices through their buy and sell decisions. Therefore, the current
stock price reflects:
1. All known information, including:
• Past information (e.g., last year’s or last quarter’s earnings)
• Current information as well as events that have been announced but are
still forthcoming (such as a stock split)
2. Information that can reasonably be inferred; for example, if many investors
believe that the Fed will cut interest rates at its meeting next week, prices will
reflect this belief before the actual event occurs.
To summarize, a market is efficient relative to any information set if investors are
unable to earn abnormal returns (returns beyond those warranted by the amount
of risk assumed) by using that information set. In an efficient market, competition
between investors seeking abnormal returns drives stock prices to their equilibrium
(“correct”) values.
Market efficiency requires that the adjustment to new information occurs very
quickly as the information becomes known. In the United States, information is
spread very quickly, almost instantaneously, to market participants that have access
to financial websites. Numerous websites offer updated information during the day
about the economy, financial markets, and individual companies. Clearly, the Inter-
net has made the market more efficient in the sense of how widely and quickly
information is disseminated.
Efficient Market A market
in which security prices
quickly and fully reflect all
available information
318 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
Concepts in Action
In 2007, Warren Buffett entered into a wager that
would extend for 10 years. Buffett bet Protege
Funds, a money management firm, that a port-
folio of hedge funds chosen by Protege would
not outperform the S&P 500 over the next 10
years. Buffett has been a big critic of the fees
charged by hedge funds. Each party put up
roughly $320,000, and a zero-coupon bond with
a payoff of $1 million was purchased, with the
proceeds going to charity. Protege hoped to
show that expert selection of five hedge funds
could outperform the index fund, while Buffett’s
argument was that outperformance by the
hedge funds would be unlikely after deducting
fees. Buffett was implicitly relying on the notion
of efficient markets to win this bet. During the
first couple years of the competition, Buffett’s
bet appeared to be in jeopardy. However, in
2018, Buffett’s selected S&P 500 Index fund was
up an average of 7.1 percent annually over
the decade, while the hedge fund portfolio
advanced by only a 2.2 percent average. Thus,
Buffett’s bet supports the view that, in the long
run, it is wise to bet on market efficiency.
3. Information is generated in a random fashion such that announcements are
basically independent of one another.
4. Investors react quickly and fully to the new information, causing stock prices
to adjust accordingly.
These conditions may seem strict, and in some sense they are. Nevertheless, con-
sider how closely they parallel the actual investments environment:
• A large number of investors are constantly “playing the game.” Both individu-
als and institutions follow the market closely on a daily basis, standing ready to
buy or sell when they think it is appropriate.
• Although the production of information is not costless, for institutions in the
investments business, generating financial information is a necessary cost of
business, and many participants receive it “free” (investors may pay for the
information in indirect fees).
• Information is largely generated in a random fashion, in the sense that most
investors cannot predict when companies will announce significant new devel-
opments, when oil disruptions will occur, when major weather events will
affect economies, when currencies will be devalued, when important lead-
ers will suddenly suffer health issues, and so forth. Although there is some
dependence in information events over time, by and large announcements
are independent and occur more or less randomly.
• The efficient market concept does not say that all investors are rational and
react quickly to new information, only that markets in aggregate are rational.
Investors with substantial resources are generally rational and ready to act on
information.
The result of these conditions is that markets efficiently reflect available informa-
tion about securities. Although mistakes are made and some irrational behavior does
occur, by and large the market does a good job when it comes to pricing securities.
The International Perspective
A strong case can be made for U.S. financial markets being efficient; after all, U.S.
markets have thousands of analysts and millions of investors buying and selling
The Concept of an Efficient Market 319
stocks regularly. What about foreign markets? Are the securities in foreign markets
analyzed less closely? Of course, the large developed countries provide much infor-
mation and tend to have companies that are well known and scrutinized. The
less-developed countries have less well-developed flows of information, and the
emerging markets may have significant gaps in information.
If there is less efficiency in the financial markets of other countries relative to the
United States, there should be some evidence of more success involving interna-
tional investing. During the last 15 years, only 7.8 percent of large-cap U.S. mutual
fund managers, 4.6 percent of mid-cap, and 6.8 percent of small-cap outperformed
the S&P 500. While the international money managers clearly did better, both
groups make an argument for market efficiency and passive investing.
More recent periods show that international money managers continue to turn
in meager performances. For the 15-year period ending in 2017, 82 percent of
global funds underperformed and 92 percent of international funds underper-
formed their benchmarks. As for emerging markets, where logically more ineffi-
ciencies should occur, 95 percent of emerging market funds underperformed their
benchmarks.
Forms of Market Efficiency
We have defined an efficient market as one in which all relevant information is
reflected in prices quickly and fully. Thus, the key to assessing market efficiency
is to determine how well information is reflected in prices. In a perfectly efficient
market, security prices quickly reflect all available information, and investors
are not able to use available information to earn abnormal returns because it is
already impounded in prices. In such a market, every security’s price is equal to its
intrinsic value.
Abnormal return is defined as the return in excess of what an investor should
expect given the amount of risk taken. The abnormal return is calculated as the dif-
ference between the security’s actual return and the security’s expected/required
return. In other words, after adjusting for what the company’s return should have
been, any remaining portion of the actual return is an abnormal return.
Abnormal return ARit it itR E R
where
ARit
it
i t
R
the abnormal return for security during period
the actual return on security during period
th
i t
E R it ee expected return for security during periodi t
Thus, the abnormal return is the stock’s return over and above what the stock
should earn as predicted by a particular approach. There are three common
approaches that are used to derive expected returns as follows:
1. The expected return is measured as the return of a broad market index (e.g.,
the S&P 500). This approach is appropriate if the stock has approximately
average risk.
2. The expected return is the return predicted by an asset pricing model such
as the market model, the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), or any of the
multifactor models. See Chapter 9 for a discussion of the alternative asset
pricing models.
Abnormal Return Return
on a security beyond that
expected on the basis of
its risk
320 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
Technical analysts look for patterns in stock prices that
can be exploited. Figure 12.3 shows 30 days of price
changes for Botox Company. Notice that in every case but one, whenever the
price change is less than 20 cents, the next price change is strongly positive.
Furthermore, whenever the price change is above 80 cents, the next price
change is almost always lower. Is this a successful example of using past price
information to predict future price changes?
The answer is NO! The changes in Figure 12.3 were generated by the
random number generator function in Excel. This illustrates the danger of
trying to find useful patterns in stock prices.
EXAMPLE 12.1
3. The expected return is the return for a firm that has comparable character-
istics to the firm being considered. For example, the comparison firm is of
approximately the same size, has comparable price multiples, and operates in
the same industry.
The efficient market hypothesis (EMH) is simply the formal statement of mar-
ket efficiency concerned with the extent to which security prices quickly and fully
reflect available information. In 1970, Eugene Fama proposed dividing the EMH
into three categories, which have typically been used since in EMH discussions.
These three classifications are illustrated in Figure 12.2.2
1. Weak Form: One of the most traditional types of information used in assess-
ing security values is market data, which refers primarily to past price and
volume information. If security prices are determined in a market that is
weak-form efficient, market data should already be reflected in current
prices and should be of no value in predicting future price changes. Since
market data are the basis of technical analysis (discussed in Chapter 16),
technical analysis is of little or no value if a market is weak form efficient.
In other words, in a weak-form efficient market, the use of market data
would not be expected to offer opportunities for investors to earn abnor-
mal returns.
The Concept of an Efficient Market 321
Tests of the usefulness of market data are called weak-form tests of the
EMH. If the weak form of the EMH is correct, past price changes should be
unrelated to future price changes. In other words, a weakly efficient market
exists if the current price reflects all past market data. The implication of
a weak-form efficient market is that past price information is of no value in
assessing future price changes.3
2. Semistrong Form: A more comprehensive level of market efficiency involves
not only market data but also all publicly known and available data, such as
earnings, dividends, stock split announcements, new product developments,
financing difficulties, and accounting changes. A market that quickly incor-
porates all such information into prices is said to show semistrong-form
efficiency. Note that a semistrong efficient market encompasses the weak
form of the hypothesis, because market data are part of the larger set of all
publicly available information.
A semistrong form efficient market implies that investors cannot act on pub-
lic information after its announcement and expect to earn above-average risk-
adjusted (abnormal) returns. If lags exist in the adjustment of stock prices to
certain announcements and investors can exploit these lags and earn abnor-
mal returns, then the market is not fully efficient in the semistrong sense.
3. Strong Form: The most stringent form of market efficiency is the strong
form, which asserts that stock prices fully reflect all information, public and
nonpublic. If the market is strong form efficient, no group of investors should
expect to earn abnormal returns by using any information.
The strong-form EMH incorporates private information—that is, informa-
tion not publicly available because it is restricted to certain groups such as
Semistrong Form That
part of the EMH stating
that prices reflect all pub-
licly available information
Strong Form That part
of the EMH stating that
prices reflect all informa-
tion, public and private
120
100
80
60
Price change in cents
40
20
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Time
16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
FIGURE 12.3 Botox company price changes for 30 days
3 It is incorrect to state that the best estimate of price at time t + 1 is the current (time t) price, because
this implies an expected return of zero. The EMH in no way implies that the expected return on any
security is zero.
322 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
corporate insiders and specialists on the exchanges. The strong form holds
that no one with private information can make money using this information.
Needless to say, such an extreme belief is not held by many people.
As noted earlier, if one believes in semistrong-form efficiency, the weak form is
also encompassed. Strong-form efficiency encompasses the weak and semistrong
forms and represents the highest level of market efficiency. An investor who believes
in the strong form of the EMH should be a passive investor. On the other hand, an
investor who accepts the weak form but rejects the other two could be an aggressive
investor, trading actively in pursuit of investing gains.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Should investors expect stock prices to reflect all available information?
2. Suppose stock-price movements are predictable. Would this be evidence of
market efficiency or market inefficiency? Explain.
How to Test for Market Efficiency
Due to the significance of the EMH and because of the controversy that surrounds
the EMH, we consider some empirical evidence on market efficiency. A very large
number of EMH studies have been done over the years. Our purpose here is simply
to present an idea of how these tests are done and offer some generalized notion
of their results.
• The key to testing the validity of the three forms of market efficiency is the
consistency with which investors can earn abnormal returns, conditional on
the information set involved.
Short-lived inefficiencies appearing on a random basis do not constitute evi-
dence of market inefficiencies. In an economically efficient market, assets are priced in
such a manner that investors cannot exploit any discrepancies and earn abnormal
returns after consideration of all transaction costs. In such a market, some securi-
ties can be slightly mispriced, and lags can exist in the processing of information,
but, again, not in such a way that the differences can be profitably exploited by the
average investor.
Investors may earn abnormal returns even if the market is efficient. After all, you
could buy a stock today, and tomorrow a major discovery could be announced that
would cause the firm’s stock price to increase significantly. Does this mean the mar-
ket is inefficient? Obviously not; it means you are either very skillful or, more likely,
very lucky. The question is, can you, and other investors, do this a sufficient number
of times in the long run to earn abnormal profits? Given the large number of inves-
tors, even in the long run, there will be some investors that experience unusual luck.
Weak-Form Tests
As noted, weak-form efficiency means that past market data are incorporated into
current stock prices. If prices follow nonrandom trends, stock-price changes are
dependent on previous changes. Therefore, weak-form tests involve the question of
whether all information contained in the sequence of past prices is fully reflected
in the current price.
How to Test for Market Efficiency 323
The weak-form EMH is related to an idea popular in the 1960s stating that stock-
price changes follow a random walk. If prices follow a random walk, price changes
over time are random (independent). 4 The price change for today is unrelated to
the price change yesterday, or the day before, or any other day. If new information
arrives randomly in the market and investors react to it immediately, changes in
prices will be random.
There are two primary ways to test for weak-form efficiency:
1. Statistically test the independence of stock-price changes. If the tests suggest
that price changes are independent, the implication is that knowing and
using past price information is of no value to an investor.
2. Test specific trading rules that attempt to use past price data. If such tests
legitimately produce abnormal returns, it suggests that the market is not
weak-form efficient.
• When considering weak-form tests of market efficiency, it is important to dis-
tinguish between statistical dependence and economic dependence in stock-price
changes.
Statistical tests detected a small amount of dependence in price changes. Not all
of the series could be said to be completely independent statistically. However, they
were economically independent in that one could not exploit the small statistical
dependence that existed. After brokerage costs, abnormal returns disappear. 5
Weak-form tests, both of statistical independence and of trading rules, are numer-
ous and almost unanimous in their conclusions. These tests support the notion that
the market is weak-form efficient.
Semistrong-Form Tests
Many semistrong-form tests are tests of the speed of price adjustment to announce-
ments of publicly available information. The question is whether investors can use
publicly available information to earn abnormal returns, after adjusting for transac-
tion costs.
Event studies The empirical research into semistrong-form efficiency often
involves an event study, which examines the speed of investors’ reaction to a mate-
rial announcement.
• Event studies allow us to control for aggregate market returns while firm-
unique events are examined.
Random Walk A theory
from the 1960s stating
that stock prices wander
randomly across time
Event Study An empiri-
cal analysis of stock-price
behavior surrounding a
particular event
Suppose an analyst wants to study the relationship between
earnings surprises and stock prices. An event study would
quantify the relationship between quarterly earnings announcements (which
contain the surprises) and stock prices around the announcement.
EXAMPLE 12.2
4 Technically, the random walk hypothesis is more restrictive than the weak-form EMH. Stock prices can
conform to weak-form efficiency without meeting the conditions of a random walk. The random walk
model specifies that successive returns are independent and are identically distributed over time.
5 Some studies suggest that trading rules can produce profits after adjusting for transaction costs. For
a counter argument, see Ray Ball, S. P. Kothari, and Charles Wasley, “Can We Implement Research on
Stock Trading Rules?,” The Journal of Portfolio Management (Winter 1995): 54–63.
324 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
Concepts in Action
How Efficient Are Markets in Processing
Information?
The evidence suggests that markets are incred-
ibly efficient. A study to address this issue was
conducted by two researchers who evaluated
stock prices around the greatest space disaster
in U.S. history, the Challenger crash.6 To assess the
efficiency of the market’s price-discovery process,
the authors examined the speed and accu-
racy of the stock market reaction to the crash’s
announcement. The announcement produced
a significant drop in stock price for four firms,
each of which was potentially responsible for
the crash. However, the authors found that within
an hour the market placed the blame squarely
on Morton Thiokol. Morton Thiokol was ultimately
confirmed as the culprit by a panel of renowned
experts, but that conclusion was announced sev-
eral months later. Furthermore, Morton Thiokol’s
day-of-crash price reaction of negative 12 per-
cent was quick, permanent, and corresponded
closely with the value in losses the firm ultimately
faced. In contrast, prices for the three other firms
that were deemed potentially at fault rebounded
almost completely by the end of the announce-
ment day.
The event study methodology examines abnormal returns around the event’s
announcement date. When studying a particular event, such as earnings surprises,
we want to be sure the abnormal return measures the effect of the event and not
some other economic factor occurring at the same time. To do this, studies include
multiple firms experiencing the same event on different dates in order that other
economic factors cancel each other. This allows us to calculate an average abnormal
return across the firms. We will call this average, ARt, whereas for each individual
company, the abnormal return is ARit.
The cumulative abnormal return (CAR) is the sum of the average abnormal
returns (ARt) over the period under examination and is calculated as
CAR AR
t
n
t
1
where
CAR the cumalative abnormal return
The CAR captures the average firm-specific stock movements over some time
period during which the event being studied is expected to affect stock returns.
Consider Figure 12.4(a), which shows a situation where an announcement is
unanticipated in an efficient market. The CAR is near zero prior to the announce-
ment date. On the announcement date there is an immediate upward adjustment
to new, and positive, information. After this adjustment takes place, stocks are once
again fairly valued, and the CAR fluctuates along a horizontal path.
Now consider Figure 12.4(b), the case of an anticipated favorable event in an
efficient market. Investors anticipate the event, and the CAR rises as investors
Market Anomalies 327
Profitable insider trading is a violation of strong-form efficiency, which requires a
market in which no investor can consistently earn abnormal profits. Investors with-
out access to private information can observe what insiders are doing by monitoring
insider trades. Insider trading information is made available to investors, with only a
few days lag, on websites such as Yahoo! Finance. Successful use of this information
by outsiders (the general public) would be a violation of semistrong-form efficiency.
Rozeff and Zaman used the typical abnormal return methodology of previous
studies and found that outsiders can earn profits by acting on the publicly avail-
able information concerning insider transactions.9 However, after deducting trans-
action costs and adjusting for differences in firm size and price multiples, these
profits largely disappeared. Furthermore, after imposing realistic transactions cost
on corporate insiders, the authors found that insider returns fell; however, they still
earned an abnormal return of 3–3.5 percent per year.
Checking Your Understanding
3. Assume stock prices truly follow a random walk. Is this evidence of market
irrationality?
4. Given the overall evidence supporting market efficiency, how might an insti-
tutional investor, such as a mutual fund or endowment, justify spending large
amounts on stock selection techniques?
Market Anomalies
Market anomalies are observations that contrast with what would be expected in an
efficient market. They represent findings that cannot be explained with the prevail-
ing theory or appropriate security market behavior. To date, many of them have not
been explained away, and until they are, they remain anomalies or exceptions to the
accepted view about market efficiency.
• Market anomalies constitute exceptions to prevailing views regarding market
efficiency.
We examine several anomalies that have generated much attention and have
yet to be satisfactorily explained. However, investors must be cautious in viewing
any of these anomalies as a stock selection device guaranteed to outperform the
market. There is no such guarantee because empirical tests of these anomalies may
not approximate actual trading strategies that could be followed by investors. Fur-
thermore, even if anomalies exist and can be identified, investors should still hold
a portfolio of stocks rather than concentrating on a few stocks identified by one of
these methods. As we saw in Chapter 7, diversification is crucial for all investors—
indeed, diversification is the number one rule of portfolio management.
Earnings Announcements
The adjustment of stock prices to earnings announcements has been studied in
several papers, opening up some interesting questions and possibilities. Earnings
Market Anomalies Obser-
vations that are contrary
to what should exist in an
efficient market
9 Michael S. Rozeff and Mir A. Zaman, “Market Efficiency and Insider Trading: New Evidence,” Journal of
Business (January 1988): 25–45.
330 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
about 1 in 10 candidates on the basis of low P/E passes his additional screens, such
as dividend yields higher than average and accelerating earnings growth. Dreman
also suggests an emphasis on large stocks as opposed to small-company stocks.
In his popular book, What Works on Wall Street: A Guide to the Best Performing Invest-
ment Strategies of All Time, James O’Shaughnessy considers the alternative price mul-
tiples and finds that all the popular price multiples, including P/E, price-to-book
(P/B), price-to-sales (P/S), and price-to-cash flow (P/CF), effectively identify stock
winners and losers. Specifically, low (high) price multiples were associated with
higher (lower) returning stocks. However, his evidence indicated that P/S was most
effective as a screen across a diverse range of firm sizes.
The Size Effect
Another anomaly that generates considerable attention is the firm size effect or
small-firm effect. In well-publicized studies, Rolf Banz and Mark Reinganum found
that the stocks of small firms earned higher risk-adjusted returns than the stocks
of large firms (on average). Furthermore, the research documented that this size
effect persisted for many years.12
Many investors generally accept the notion that small caps outperform large
caps, based partly on results from the Ibbotson Associates data, which shows that,
on average, “small” stocks have outperformed the S&P 500 Index by roughly 2 per-
centage points per year; however, “small” as used in this context means the bot-
tom 20 percent of NYSE stocks based on market value. Remember that small firms
should return more than large firms because they have greater risk; the identified
anomaly is that even after adjusting for risk differences, small firms outperformed,
that is, they provided abnormal positive returns. On average, small stocks have out-
performed large stocks; however, there are multiyear periods when large caps have
outperformed small caps. Furthermore, Dreman has argued that the size “myth” is
based on stocks that trade thinly or not at all. In his book, What Works on Wall Street,
James O’Shaughnessy supports Dreman’s view as he claims that the returns associ-
ated with small stocks are mostly associated with microcap stocks, which have very
small capitalizations and are not easily bought by individuals or even institutions
because of large spreads and commissions.13
The January Effect
Several studies suggest that seasonality exists in the stock market. Keim found that
roughly 50 percent of the small-firm premium reported by Reinganum is concen-
trated in January. The strong performance in January by small-company stocks is
known as the January effect and is often attributed to end-of-year, tax-based trading. 14
Size Effect The observed
tendency for smaller firms
to have positive abnormal
stock returns
January Effect The
observed tendency for
small- company stock
returns to be higher in
January relative to other
months
12 Rolf Banz, “The Relationship Between Returns and Market Value of Common Stocks,” Journal of Finan-
cial Economics, 9 (March 1981): 3–18. Mark Reinganum, “Misspecification of Capital Asset Pricing: Empir-
ical Anomalies Based on Earnings Yield and Market Values,” Journal of Financial Economics, 9 (March
1981): 19–46.
13 A more detailed discussion of this issue can be found in Marc R. Reinganum, “The Size Effect: Evidence
and Potential Explanations,” in Investing in Small-Cap and Microcap Securities, Association for Investment
Management and Research, 1997.
14 For a discussion of the January Effect and several other anomalies, see Donald B. Keim, “The CAPM
and Equity Return Regularities,” Financial Analysts Journal (May June 1986): 19–34 and Donald B. Keim,
“Dividend Yields and the January Effect,” The Journal of Portfolio Management (Winter 1986): 54–60. Rich-
ard Roll, “Vas ist das? The Turn of the Year Effect and the Return Premium of Small Firms,” The Journal
of Portfolio Management (Winter 1983): 18–28.
Market Anomalies 333
The Value Line Ranking System
The Value Line Investment Survey is the largest, and perhaps best-known, investment
service in the country. Value Line ranks each of the roughly 1,700 stocks it covers
from 1 (best) to 5 (worst) as to its “timeliness”—probable relative price perfor-
mance within the next 12 months. These timeliness ranks, updated weekly, have
been available since 1965.
During the period from 1965 through 2011, the ranking system clearly showed
monotonic discrimination ability. That is, Group 1 stocks performed best, Group 2
stocks performed second best, and so on down to Group 5 stocks, which performed
the worst. Figure 12.6 shows the record for the Value Line ranks allowing for annual
changes in rank.
The Value Line Investment Survey now regularly reports a comparison of the relative
price performance of its Group 1 stocks with four other strategies: low P/E, low cap
(small size), low price/book value, and low price/sales. These results are shown in
Figure 12.7 for the period 1966 through mid-2008.
Figure 12.7 suggests that Value Line’s Group 1 stocks outperformed the other
four strategies by a significant amount. Interestingly, by this comparison the
small-cap stocks did better than the other strategies (other than Value Line’s
Group 1), with the low P/E ratio strategy the next best. The low P/S and low
P/B did poorly in this comparison. It is easy to see from Figure 12.7 why Value
Line has stated, “The lesson is clear—stay with the Group 1s.” Several studies of
the success of Value Line’s rankings exist, and not surprisingly, the results vary. It
appears that the rankings, and changes in the rankings, do contain useful infor-
mation. For example, Mark Hulbert, who monitors the performance of investing
newsletters, has noted that the Value Line Investment Survey has been at or near
the top in his rankings for long-term risk-adjusted performance for 28 years as
of mid-2008.
However, there is evidence that the market adjusts quickly to this information
(one or two trading days following the Friday release) and that true transaction
1965
40,000%
Group 1
Group 2
S&P 500
Dj Ind’t
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
20,000%
10,000%
1,000%
500%
100%
0%
–50%
–75%
5,000%
1970 1975 1980
Record of Value Line ranks for timelines
Allowing for annual changes in rank (1965–2011)
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
Group 1: 18,386% 11.8%
11.1%
9.2%
7.7%
4.2%
5.7%
5.9%
13,410%
5,961%
9,148%
574%
1,240%
1,327%
Cumulative
return Per annum
return
Group 2:
Group 3:
Group 4:
Group 5:
DJ Ind’t:
S&P 500:
FIGURE 12.6 Record of Value Line ranks for timeliness, allowing for annual changes in rank, 1965–2011
Source: “Value Line Selection and Opinion,” The Value Line Investment Survey, January 27, 2012, p. 1779. Reprinted by
Permission.
Behavioral Finance 335
Some anomalies offer strong evidence supporting the existence of market
inefficiencies. However, Eugene Fama, a long-time proponent of market effi-
ciency, argues that the evidence on anomalies does not refute the EMH. 24
He believes that many of the studies showing anomalies contain statistical prob-
lems. He also believes that overreaction and underreaction are about equally
likely to be found, which suggests that markets are efficient because this behav-
ior can be attributable to chance. For example, the postannouncement earnings
drift observed in the SUE studies suggests underreaction to information. The
poor performance of Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) over five years is evidence
of overreaction.
Checking Your Understanding
5. Does the existence of market anomalies disprove the EMH?
6. Do you think it is easier, or more difficult, for someone to engage in data
mining today?
Behavioral Finance
Much of economics and finance is grounded on the proposition that individuals
act rationally and consider all available information in the decision-making process.
However, markets consist of human beings who have limited information- processing
capabilities, who have inherent biases, who make mistakes, and who often rely on
the opinions of brokers, financial advisors, and the financial press. In short, people
are subject to irrationality in their financial decisions.
In a well-known book titled Against the Gods, Bernstein notes that one finds
“repeated patterns of irrationality, inconsistency, and incompetence in the ways
The Motley Fool is a popular and well-known source of
investment information and ideas for individual investors.
Operating a website and also producing other publications, this source has
advocated that small investors can often do well in the market by applying
simple principles. One technique advocated by the Motley Fool was the “Foolish
Four,” a system that involved taking the 30 stocks in the DJIA and calculating
the ratio of the dividend yield to the square root of the share price. The stock
with the highest ratio was ignored, and the next four highest became the
Foolish Four. The founders of the Motley Fool claimed that the Foolish Four
strategy, which required only 15 minutes a year to implement, was so effective
it would “crush your mutual funds.” A Money Magazine columnist who criticized
this technique was severely criticized by Motley Fool followers. Eventually, the
founders had to admit that this technique did not work, saying it was a result of
faulty analysis of historical data resulting from “finding random correlations
and considering them valid and repeatable.”
336 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
human beings arrive at decisions and choices when faced with uncertainty.”25 His
conclusion is consistent with the argument that an understanding of human psy-
chology could help to explain some stock market behavior.
Behavioral Finance integrates cognitive (how people think) psychology with
finance. It holds that investors’ emotions and biases affect stock prices and markets.
• Behavioral finance says investors are prone to systematic mistakes in their
financial decision making. Markets overreact, both up and down. Investors are
motivated by numerous “irrational” forces; other investors, recognizing these
mistakes in judgment, may be able to profitably exploit them.
Behavioral finance analyzes behavioral biases and the effects these biases have on
financial markets. The behavioral finance view of markets and market efficiency is
based on the following propositions26
:
1. Informed traders face risk aversion constraints in seeking to keep prices effi-
cient. The EMH argues that well-informed, risk-tolerant investors keep prices
at their “fair values.” When prices get sufficiently out of line to warrant action
by investors, they act to move them back. However, there are limits to arbi-
trage, which may constrain price adjustments.
2. Individual investors, who are considered the uninformed investors, generate
trade imbalances that drive prices away from fundamental value.
3. Over time, informed investors will drive prices back to fundamental value.
4. The trading decisions of individual investors are biased due to predisposi-
tions associated with human behavior. For example, several of the behavioral
biases are an outgrowth of the basic principle of framing. Framing refers to
the fact that individuals often arrive at different decisions depending on how
an issue or question is framed.
An important step in establishing behavioral finance as a discipline was the work of
DeBondt and Thaler.27 They proposed an “overreaction hypothesis,” which states that
people overreact to unexpected and dramatic news events. As applied to stock prices,
the hypothesis states that, due to overreactions, loser portfolios (portfolios of stocks
with poor long-term prior performance) outperform, and winner portfolios (port-
folios of stocks with strong long-term prior performance) underperform. DeBondt
and Thaler interpreted this evidence as indicative of irrational behavior by investors.
Behavioral Finance The
study of investment
behavior, based on the
belief that investors do not
always act rationally
Concepts in Action
How Do Individuals Use Frames to Make
Decisions?
Behavioral economists contend that individ-
uals tend to draw different conclusions from
information depending on how the information
is presented. For example, individuals presented
with an opportunity of winning either $8 or $32
should be happy that they are presented with
a winning situation no matter how it turns out.
However, those individuals that won $8 reported
being dissatisfied. In contrast, individuals given
an option of losing either $8 or $32 should have
25 Peter L. Bernstein, Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1998), p. 12.
26 These propositions and their discussion are based on Terrance Odean, “Effect of Behavioral Biases on
Market Efficiency and Investors’ Welfare,” Conference Proceedings Quarterly, CFA Institute, 24, no. 1, March,
2007, pp. 6–16.
27 Werner F. M. DeBondt and Richard Thaler, “Does the Stock Market Overreact?,” The Journal of Finance
(July 1985): 793–805.
Behavioral Finance 337
Behavioral Biases
There are numerous behavioral biases that researchers have identified in individu-
als’ actions. Note that the biases do not afflict all individuals, but they are common
enough to deserve our attention. As you read through this section, you are likely to
recognize several biases in your own beliefs and actions. We separate the biases into
three categories, emotional, belief perseverance, and information processing, and
discuss examples in each category.
An emotional bias is based on an individual’s state of mind that arises spontane-
ously, rather than through conscious effort. We discuss nine alternative emotional
biases below.
1. Loss aversion—relates to the so-called disposition effect. Studies of trading
records show that investors are nearly 50 percent more likely to sell winners
than losers. Because investors are subject to loss aversion, they feel the pain
of a loss more than the pleasure of a gain—therefore, they are reluctant to
sell their losers even though losses are tax deductible. Furthermore, evi-
dence suggests this bias applies to fund managers as well as individual inves-
tors. Those “sophisticated” investors are eager to sell winners and reluctant
to sell losers. Poorly performing managers (based on their recent 12-month
performance) sell winners nearly twice as often as losers. This bias results
in investors holding losers too long and selling winners too soon (often
referenced as the disposition effect). As a result, the bias is extremely tax
inefficient.
2. Overconfidence—manifests itself in the observation that a majority of
money managers and investors think their ability is above average. They
think they have more skill than they actually possess. Research shows that
this bias leads overconfident investors to trade more than other investors,
which produces inferior investment performance. Barber and Odean find
that buy and hold investors outperformed the most active investors by about
6 percent a year.
3. Familiarity bias—is closely related to overconfidence and reflects the idea
that investors become more confident with things in which they are more
been disappointed with their losing options; how-
ever, those individuals losing only $8 felt positive
because they avoided losing $32. Thus, when
the gamble was framed in terms of losses, they
felt good about losing $8, whereas when the
gamble was framed in terms of gains, they felt
bad about winning $8.
Or alternatively, consider an individual given
two options for paying for an extravagance. Let’s
assume that extravagance is a new motorcycle
worth $24,000 to be delivered in six months:
Option 1 is $4,000 per month over the next six
months, and Option 2 is $4,000 per month over
the six months after the motorcycle is delivered.
Clearly, we know from time value of money
that Option 2 is preferable and virtually everyone
chooses that option. However, now let’s assume
the same payment options exist but the extrav-
agance is a one-week vacation. Now, what
researchers find is that many individuals choose
Option 1. Why? Because who wants to be paying
for a vacation for six months after the vacation is
over. People want to enjoy their vacation without
worrying about having to pay for it for six months
after their return. The economically rational
choice is always Option 1, no matter what the
asset. However, it is easy to see how the “frame”
can change an individual’s choice.
338 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
familiar. This bias leads to investors allocating too much of their investment
to domestic stocks (home country bias), their own company’s stock, and local
firms.
4. Status quo bias—reflects the observation that individuals prefer to do noth-
ing than to make a change. Individuals are more comfortable keeping things
as they are, thus they will stay with the default situation rather than putting
forth the effort to opt out of the default.
5. Self-control bias—reflects the tendency for individuals to choose short-term
satisfaction in favor of long-term good. The bias is manifested due to a lack of
self-discipline and is present in many of life’s decisions such as healthy eating,
smoking, exercising, and studying.
6. Endowment bias—is the tendency for individuals to place a higher value on
an asset after they establish ownership of the asset, i.e., they become attached
to the asset. The attachment can occur due to the asset’s purchase or inherit-
ance, and it often grows with time and with the effort allocated in advance of
taking ownership.
7. Regret aversion—causes individuals to avoid an action for fear the action
will cause mental anguish. For example, investors avoid trading for fear
that they will trade a security at the wrong time. This reflects an error of
commission, which is more painful than failing to make a good trade, an
error of omission. One aspect of regret aversion is the unopened-envelope
syndrome, which reflects the observation that during bear market periods,
investors discard their account reports without opening them to avoid facing
the bad news.
8. Snake-bit effect—individuals avoid situations where they have had negative
results in the past. For example, investors avoid investments in which they
have had previous losses.
9. House-money effect—investors are less risk averse with funds derived from
winnings or gains. The loss of gambling proceeds or investment gains causes
individuals little remorse; thus, individuals often take excessive risk with these
funds.
Belief perseverance biases are associated with cognitive dissonance, which is the
mental discomfort that occurs when new information conflicts with previously held
beliefs. Individuals exhibit several biases that help them to avoid this discomfort. We
discuss five of these biases below.
1. Conservatism—causes individuals to overweight their initial beliefs and
under-react to new information. This bias causes forecasts and valuations to
change less than are warranted.
2. Confirmation—is reflected by individuals gathering information that rein-
forces their original beliefs, while discounting information that refutes those
beliefs.
3. Representativeness—causes individuals to classify and interpret information
based on their past experiences even when the information may reflect a
unique situation.
4. Illusion of control—individuals believe they have more control than they do,
infer connections between variables where none exist, or assume they have
predictive ability over chance events.
5. Hindsight bias—involves individuals remembering their predictions as more
accurate than they were. Individuals fill in memory gaps with what they prefer
to believe, which prevents them from learning from the past.
Behavioral Finance 339
Information-processing biases are cognitive errors that involve information being
processed and used incorrectly or irrationally. We discuss four of these information-
processing biases below.
1. Anchoring and reference points—individuals tend to establish a default num-
ber as an anchor for a reference point for decision-making; they then adjust
their final estimate up or down. The bias is created because they tend to adjust
their estimates by an insufficient amount. This bias often manifests itself in
individuals refusing to sell assets below a set price. For example, homeown-
ers will often pay real estate taxes, insurance, mortgage payments, etc., for
an extended period to avoid selling their home below a price they envision,
which is often based on the purchase price.
2. Mental accounting—individuals treat sums of money differently depending
on the mental account in which the money is classified. Assets are grouped
into noninterchangeable mental accounts such as the college education
account, vacation account, Christmas gift account, grocery account, etc. Men-
tal accounting is diametrically opposed to the principle of modern portfolio
theory.
3. Framing—reflects the idea that an individual’s decision is influenced by the
way the information is framed. For example, when physicians present treat-
ment options, patients have a much more positive outlook if the outcome is
described in terms of percent survivors, rather than percent of fatalities. An
aspect of framing is naïve diversification (sometimes called the 1/n strategy)
in which investors spread their investment evenly across presented invest-
ment options because they view the presented options as a recommendation.
4. Availability bias—occurs when individuals base the probability of an out-
come on their familiarity with the situation. They assume that readily mem-
orable events are more likely to occur, thus, recent and noteworthy events
are assigned higher probabilities of future occurrence. Overreaction is an
outcome of this bias as individuals tend to overreact to notable positive and
negative news events. The observation that variables mean revert provides
evidence for an overreaction bias. As time passes an event’s effect diminishes
and things return to normal i.e., mean revert.
The main problem with behavioral biases is that they can be disastrous to one’s
financial health. Specifically, behavioral biases contradict the principles necessary
for successful portfolio management. First, many of the biases encourage investors
to trade too frequently, thus running up transaction’s costs. Second, the biases moti-
vate investors to sell winners too early, while holding on to losers too long. These
two symptoms result in a strategy that is extremely tax inefficient as it results in
paying capital gains taxes without harvesting capital losses. Third, the biases often
lead investors to form portfolios that are mal-diversified. They tend to be concen-
trated in a type of security or in securities that have performed in a similar manner.
Fourth, many of the biases encourage actions that run counter to basic economic
policies such as not considering time value of money or ignoring opportunity costs.
Finally, the biases cause investors to make decisions that are focused on a single fac-
tor, rather than taking a portfolio perspective.
You probably recognized that some of the behavioral biases run counter to one
another. For example, some biases encourage trading, whereas others discourage
trading. In general, though they promote the wrong trading decisions, whether
too frequent for some securities or not frequent enough for other securities.
You also may have noticed that many of the biases compound on one another and
340 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
promote very poor decisions. Overall, recognizing the behavioral biases will
allow you to improve your own decision-making, and also assist others in improv-
ing theirs.
Efficient Markets Versus Behavioral Finance
The EMH assumes that markets are rational even if all investors are not rational.
Competition among investors seeking abnormal returns drives stock prices to their
fundamental values. Behavioral finance, on the other hand, says investors may make
systematic errors in the way they think.
The EMH assumes investors are risk averse, whereas behavioral finance argues
they are loss averse. Furthermore, the EMH assumes that investors consider deci-
sions in a portfolio context, whereas behavioral finance contends investors separate
investment decisions.
• According to the EMH, markets are informationally efficient. According to
behavioral finance, in some circumstances markets may be informationally
inefficient.
A basic misunderstanding of behavioral finance is that it says people can beat
the market. It does not. What it says is that market prices and fundamental val-
ues can diverge because of psychology. Opportunities may be present as a result of
this divergence; however, investment managers won’t necessarily try to exploit the
opportunities. Why? Informed investors may not be willing to take the risk involved
to try to exploit these opportunities, or constraints exist that prevent them from
doing so.
Behavioral Finance Implications for Investors
David Dreman, a money manager and columnist for Forbes, has been a leading pro-
ponent of behavioral finance. He particularly espouses the “investor overreaction
hypothesis,” which states that investors overreact to events in a predictable manner,
overvaluing the best alternatives and undervaluing the worst. Premiums and dis-
counts are the result, and eventually these situations reverse as assets regress toward
the mean or average valuation.
This behavior has led Dreman to his “contrarian investing” philosophy, which
involves taking positions that are currently out of favor. For example, in 1998
growth investing was much more profitable than value investing, but Dreman
continued to recommend stocks that looked promising on a value basis on the
assumption that value stocks would once again excel. 28 And Dreman is famous for
recommending that investors buy low P/E stocks, rather than the currently popu-
lar high P/E stocks.
Behavioral Finance Today
Behavioral finance can perhaps be traced back to 1979 when Tversky and Kahne-
man offered the first significant alternative to the expected utility theory underlying
Contrarian Investing The
theory that it pays to trade
contrary to most investors
28 Dreman published a book called Contrarian Investment Strategies: The Next Generation, by Simon and
Schuster. He also started a new journal, The Journal of Psychology and Financial Markets.
Some Conclusions about Market Efficiency 341
traditional rational financial decision making. Clear recognition of the impact of
behavioral finance came in 2002 with the awarding of the Nobel prize in econom-
ics to Daniel Kahneman, a Princeton psychologist, and to Vernon Smith of George
Mason University, whose economic experiments are at odds with the EMH. Even
Burton Malkiel, a leading proponent of market efficiency, includes a chapter on the
lessons to be learned from behavioral finance in the latest edition of his well-known
book, A Random Walk Down Wall Street.29
Needless to say, behavioral finance has not gone unchallenged. Eugene Fama,
a leading proponent of efficient markets, has presented an argument against the
behaviorists and their claims that anomalies have been found in historical asset
prices.30 He argues that data mining techniques allow researchers to discover appar-
ent patterns but that their significance is questionable at best.
Checking Your Understanding
7. How does the concept of investor underreaction or overreaction to news and
information fit with the concept of behavioral finance?
Some Conclusions about Market Efficiency
Given all of the evidence about market efficiency, what conclusions can be drawn?
John Maynard Keynes, one of the most famous economists of the 20th century, pro-
posed a cynical view of the market when suggesting the stock market is a “casino”
guided by “animal spirits.”
The overwhelming evidence in support of market efficiency has convinced
many market observers of its pervasiveness. And almost certainly, the widespread
availability of information and data on the Internet, along with the investment
tools offered there, has made the market even more efficient. Consider the para-
graph by Samuel Eisenstadt quoted early in the chapter. Eisenstadt was the pri-
mary force in the development of Value Line’s famed ranking system for stocks,
one of the best-known and most successful systems ever developed for general
investor use. Eisenstadt noted that “beating the market is difficult and becoming
even more so.” 31
Nevertheless, many investors are convinced that they can outperform the mar-
ket. Paradoxically, this belief helps to make the market efficient. Consider the quote
from Charles Ellis, a well-known investment consultant and author:
“The problem is not that professional managers lack skill or diligence. Quite the
opposite. The problem with trying to beat the market is that professional investors
are so talented, so numerous, and so dedicated to their work that as a group they
make it very difficult for any one of their number to do significantly better than the
others, particularly in the long run.”
342 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
Perhaps the most telling evidence in favor of market efficiency is the perfor-
mance of professional investors such as mutual funds, for whom we have detailed
performance data. Consider some statistics on their performance33
:
1. Approximately 70 percent of mutual fund managers underperform over a
10-year period and 80 percent underperform over a 20-year period.
2. Consider the top 25 percent of large funds during the period 2001–2006.
Over the subsequent five years, 2007–2011, only 12 percent of the earlier top
performers were in the top 25 percent.
3. As for institutional portfolios, research shows that after adjusting for risk, well
under 1 percent achieve superior results after all adjustments for costs.
For some additional evidence about market efficiency, consider the 28-year
results of the Hulbert Financial Digest. The Digest, which tracks the performance of
investment newsletters, completed 28 years in business as of mid-2008. Over that
28-year period, 41 percent of the financial newsletters did not survive. Only four of
the 17 (24 percent) of newsletters that existed for the entire time period beat the
market on a risk-adjusted basis.34
Investments Intuition
What Can Hedge Fund Portfolios Tell Us
about Market Efficiency?
We know from Chapter 3 that hedge funds are
supposed to represent sophisticated investment
funds run by top portfolio managers who have
great flexibility with the portfolio, charge substan-
tial fees, and are expected to produce out-
standing results. There are even firms that advise
investors on which hedge funds to own. Whereas
the expertise of hedge fund managers is widely
acknowledged, it may come as a surprise to
most investors that hedge funds have gener-
ally failed to outperform the S&P 500. Looking
at performance through 2017, the last year in
which hedge funds outperformed the S&P 500
was 2008. Furthermore, in 2013, hedge funds
were trounced by the market by a remarkable 23
percentage points.35
Investments Intuition
If the information is favorable, the discoverers
buy immediately, and if unfavorable, they sell
immediately. A paradox is that as investors
scramble for information and attempt to be the
first to act, they make the market more efficient.
If enough of this activity occurs, all information
will be reflected in prices. Thus, the fact that a
number of investors do not believe in the EMH
results in actions that help to make the market
efficien
Summary 343
One difficult problem for those who believe in efficient markets is the crash of
October 1987. The S&P 500 lost over 20 percent in one day. Is it really reasonable
to argue that investors, efficiently discounting information, decided in one day that
the market should be valued some 20 percent less? Not many people, including
efficient market proponents, are comfortable making this argument.
Another example is the Internet market bubble that burst in 2000, with the stock
market declining sharply over the next two years. Most observers accept the propo-
sition that a bubble did exist, that it was not based on rational behavior, and that
this is not in agreement with the efficient markets view. This observation, however,
fits with the behavioral finance view. Even Burton Malkiel, a well-known economics
professor who is a leading proponent of efficient markets, stated: “No one under-
stands better than I do that sometimes markets go crazy. . . sometimes, markets just
get it wrong.”36
The controversy about market efficiency and behavioral finance remains. Inves-
tors are faced with the choice between pursuing an active or a passive investment
strategy or some combination thereof. Making this choice depends heavily upon
what the investor believes about efficient markets. Investors who plan, or wish, to
pursue some type of active strategy should consider a quote attributed to Warren
Buffett:
“Most investors, both institutional and individual, will find that the best way to
own common stocks (shares) is through an index fund that charges minimal fees.
Those following this path are sure to beat the net results (after fees and expenses)
of the great majority of investment professionals.”
Summary
• An efficient market is one in which security prices fully reflect all information
quickly and accurately.
• The conditions that guarantee an efficient market largely exist: many inves-
tors are competing, information is widely available and generated more or less
randomly, and investors react quickly to this information.
Ethics in Investing
What Obligations Do Financial Advisors
Have to Clients?
Given the evidence on the mediocre performance
of most professional money managers, should
financial advisors explain this information to their
clients? Advisors often earn their living by the com-
missions they receive when investors trade or the
fees they earn when clients buy load funds. What
would happen if more and more clients opted for
no-load funds, index funds, and ETFs?
Aren’t investors better off with an index fund
such as Vanguard’s S&P 500 fund, which has very
low costs and has outperformed most actively
managed funds? How can an advisor justify the
recommendation of Morgan Stanley’s S&P 500
fund, with a 5.25 percent load and an annual
operating fee that is several times higher than
the fee of Vanguard’s no-load fund? Most finan-
cial advisors routinely face ethical issues such
as these.
36 Burton G. Malkiel, “In Defense of Indexing,” Conference Proceedings Quarterly, CFA Institute, December
2007, p. 9.
344 Chapter 12 Market Efficiency
• To assess market efficiency, three degrees of efficiency are discussed: the weak
form, the semistrong form, and the strong form. The weak form involves mar-
ket data, whereas the semistrong and strong forms involve the assimilation of
all public and private information, respectively.
• The weak-form evidence, based on tests of statistical independence and trad-
ing rules, strongly supports the hypothesis.
• Many tests of semistrong-form efficiency have been conducted, including
studies of stock splits, money supply changes, accounting changes, dividend
announcements, and earnings announcements. Although all the studies do
not agree, the majority support semistrong efficiency.
• Event studies are one type of semistrong-form test. Abnormal returns are cal-
culated for each company for which a specific event is being examined. Cumu-
lative abnormal returns show what happens before and after the event.
• Strong-form tests examine the performance of groups presumed to have “pri-
vate” information and of the ability of professional managers to outperform
the market. Insiders are able to do well, whereas the decisions of the managers
of mutual funds have not been found to add value.
• Most knowledgeable observers accept weak-form efficiency, reject strong-form
efficiency, and feel that the market is, to a large degree, semistrong efficient.
This casts doubt on the value of both technical analysis and simple forms of
fundamental analysis.
• Although the EMH does not preclude investors from outperforming the mar-
ket, it does suggest that this is quite difficult to accomplish and that the inves-
tor must do more than the norm.
• Several major “anomalies” that have appeared over the years have yet to be
satisfactorily explained. These anomalies, which would not be expected in a
totally efficient market, include the following:
1. Unexpected Earnings, SUE Effect: The market appears to adjust with a lag
to earnings surprises. SUE has been shown to be a monotonic discrimina-
tor of subsequent short-term (e.g., three-month) stock returns.
2. Value Effect: Stocks with low price multiples appear to outperform high
price multiple stocks over the long run, even after adjustment for risk and
size.
3. Size Effect: Evidence suggests that small firms outperform large firms, on
a risk-adjusted basis. However, substantial recent evidence suggests the
“small-cap” premium has disappeared.
4. Momentum and Long-Run Reversal: Evidence indicates that in the short
run stocks continue their recent performance (momentum), whereas they
reverse from their long-run performance (long-run reversal). For exam-
ple, stocks that have recently done well continue to do well, whereas stocks
that have done well for several years, reverse course and do poorly.
5. Firm Quality: Firms with strong past profitability are shown to have supe-
rior future stock performance. This measure is especially effective when
combined with price multiples.
6. Asset Growth: Firms with strong (weak) past growth in total assets have
relatively poor (strong) subsequent stock returns.
7. Value Line Performance: The Value Line rankings for timeliness appear to
have performed well over time, on average, and therefore may offer the
average investor a chance to outperform the averages.
• Data mining refers to the search for patterns in security returns by examining
various techniques applied to a data set. With enough effort, patterns will be
Questions 345
uncovered, and investing rules and techniques can be found that appear to
work in the sense of providing abnormal returns.
• Behavioral finance integrates psychology with finance. It argues that investors
often make systematic mistakes when processing information about the stock
market.
• Behavioral biases are based on individuals’ beliefs that are illogical or irra-
tional. The beliefs often lead to actions that are contrary to effective portfolio
management.
• Behavioral biases can be separated into biases based on emotion, belief perse-
verance, and information processing. Emotional biases are most common and
recognizable.
• According to behavioral finance, in some circumstances markets may be infor-
mationally inefficient. The EMH, in contrast, holds that markets are informa-
tionally efficient.
• The preponderance of evidence indicates the market is very efficient (although
not perfectly efficient). Most investors should accept the efficiency of the mar-
ket unless they have superior skills or resources.