How Securities are Traded
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain brokers’ roles and how
brokerage firms operate.
• Understand the types of orders
investors use in trading securities.
• Assess the role of regulation in the
securities markets.
• Describe how margin trading and
short selling contribute to investor
opportunities.
114CHAPTER 5
Now that you know what invest-
ing alternatives are available and
where they trade, you need to con-
sider the details of trading securi-
ties as you prepare to invest your
inheritance. What type of broker-
age account will best meet your
needs? What type of orders can
you use to buy and sell securities?
How well does securities legisla-
tion protect you from the many
pitfalls awaiting you as an investor?
Should you take additional risk by
buying stocks on margin, and if so,
how do you go about trading on
margin? Should you bet on secu-
rity price declines by selling short, or is this technique too risky for average inves-
tors? Details, details, but investors must deal with them. Unless you master these
details, you will not be able to take full advantage of the trading opportunities that
financial markets offer. Furthermore, you will be at the mercy of others who may not
have your best interests at heart.
In Chapter 4 we considered how securities markets are organized. In this chapter,
we learn the mechanics of trading securities which investors must know in order
to operate successfully in the marketplace. This chapter discusses various details
involved in trading securities and critical information for every investor. Broker-
age firms and their activities are analyzed, as are the types of orders to buy and sell
securities and the handling of these orders. The regulation of the securities markets
is discussed. Finally, the various aspects of trading securities that investors often
encounter are considered. Although the details of trading, like the organization of
securities markets, continue to evolve, the basic procedures remain the same.
Introduction
Could you as an investor carry out the following transactions? If so, how?
1. Buy Treasury securities directly from the Treasury, bypassing brokers.
2. Buy any stock you want directly from the company, bypassing brokers.
How Securities are Traded
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain brokers’ roles and how
brokerage firms operate.
• Understand the types of orders
investors use in trading securities.
• Assess the role of regulation in the
securities markets.
• Describe how margin trading and
short selling contribute to investor
opportunities.
Brokerage Transactions 115
3. Specify an exact price or better on a stock you wish to trade.
4. Buy securities by only putting up half the cost.
5. Sell a stock you don’t own in an attempt to make money on the transaction.
Brokerage Transactions
Brokerage Firms
In general, it is quite easy for any responsible person to open a brokerage account.
An investor selects a broker or brokerage house by personal contact, referral, or
reputation. Personal contact between broker and customer seldom occurs, with
transactions typically carried out by phone or by computer.
Brokers are commonly classified according to the services offered and fees
charged, and customers choose the type of broker they wish to use.
Full-service brokers Traditionally, brokerage firms offered a variety of services to
investors, particularly information and advice. Today, investors can still obtain a
wide variety of information on the economy, particular industries, individual com-
panies, and different security types from full-service brokers such as Merrill Lynch,
Morgan Stanley, Edward Jones, Raymond James, and Wells Fargo Advisors. These
large retail brokerage firms execute their customers’ orders, provide investment
research, and offer advice and recommendations to investors.
Today’s full-service stockbrokers go by different titles, such as financial consult-
ants or investment executives (or simply registered representatives). This change in
title reflects the significant changes that have occurred in the industry. Full-service
brokerage firms now derive only a small percentage of their revenues from commis-
sions paid by individual investors, a major change from the past.1 And the typical
full-service stockbroker now derives much less of his or her income from customer
commissions than was the case in the past. This is why firms such as Edward Jones
encourage their brokers to become more like fee-based financial planners and less
like salespeople.
• Full-service brokers seek to build relationships by meeting all of a client’s
needs, whether it be retirement planning, estate planning, taxes, financing
children’s education, or providing access to such exotic assets as coffee futures
and thinly traded foreign stocks.
Commissions charged by full-service brokers vary by product. For stocks, com-
missions vary across firms, although costs are typically higher than those charged
by discount brokers. Treasury securities carry a commission of less than 1 percent,
whereas a complicated limited partnership may carry a commission of 8 percent or
more.
Discount brokers Investors can choose to use a discount broker who provides vir-
tually the same services as a full-service broker except they may not offer advice and
116 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
research, and they generally charge less for the execution of trades.2 Smart inves-
tors choose the alternative that is best for them in terms of their own needs. Some
investors want personal attention and detailed research publications and are willing
to pay in the form of higher brokerage commissions. Others, however, prefer to do
their own research, make their own decisions, and pay only for order execution.
Barron’s survey of “The Best Online Brokers of 2019” finds that Interactive Bro-
kers and Fidelity rate best with each rating 4.5 out of 5 stars. E*Trade, TD Ameri-
trade, and Merrill Edge are in the next group and earned 4 stars each. To compile
its ranking, Barron’s assessed 14 brokerages across six categories. 3 With online dis-
count brokers, investors must carefully evaluate the total package of services offered.
Most prominent discount brokerage firms offer the same services to customers
such as check writing privileges, access to research reports, and a mobile app for
trading. In addition, they offer SIPC coverage, which insures the securities and cash
in customer accounts. TD Ameritrade even offers customers the ability to trade
through Amazon Echo.
Some Practical Advice
Broker Responsibilities or the Lack Thereof
Most investors have heard the term “fiduciary”;
however, many investors do not understand what
the term means. For brokers and investment
advisers, a fiduciary standard basically means
that the client’s interests come before the inter-
ests of the broker or investment adviser. However,
there is a difference in the manner in which this
standard is applied. Investment advisers are
held to a fiduciary standard that requires them
to put the client’s interest first. For example, when
recommending two investment products for a
client that would accomplish the same objective
but at different costs, they are required to rec-
ommend the cheaper of the two. Brokers, on the
other hand, are not held to this standard. As long
as the investment products they sell their clients
are suitable, brokers have satisfied their obliga-
tions. Thus, in the previous example they are not
required to recommend the cheaper alternative.
Ethics in Investing
Do You Have an Obligation Arising from
Unsolicited Good Advice?
Investors have a choice of brokers, ranging
from those providing advice and recommenda-
tions (and typically charging more) and those
offering little or no advice (and typically charg-
ing less). While we generally think of an investor
seeking out a broker, brokers often seek out
customers. Assume that you as an investor have
a brokerage account where you transact your
investing decisions. Out of the blue, a broker
you have never met, calls you (for obvious rea-
sons, this is referred to in the business as “cold
calling”). He offers to send you, for no charge,
some investing ideas. You accept the offer. You
later decide to invest in one of the stocks he
has recommended because you decide that
this stock has merit. You execute the transaction
2 Some discount brokers do provide research information beyond very basic information. This includes
standard information supplied to the brokerage from outside sources and customized information gen-
erated in-house.
3 Two brokerages, Vanguard and Firstrade, chose not to participate in the rating. See www.barrons.com.
Brokerage Transactions 117
Commissions Not surprisingly, commissions charged vary considerably even
across the discount brokers. Discount brokers typically charge between $5 and
$7 per trade; however, some deep discount brokers such as Interactive Brokers
charge even less. Robinhood offers a commission-free trading app and is quite pop-
ular with college students.
Brokerage Accounts
The most basic type of account is the cash account, whereby the customer pays the
brokerage house the full price for any securities purchased. Many customers add
margin borrowing to their account, which allows customers to borrow from the bro-
kerage firm to purchase securities. (Margin is explained in some detail later in this
chapter.) To have the margin feature, investors are required by both the NYSE and
NASD to deposit a minimum of $2,000 or 100 percent of the purchase price, which-
ever is less (this is referred to as the “minimum margin”). Some firms may require
a deposit of more than $2,000.
Most brokerage accounts today are cash management accounts (also called core
accounts and sweep accounts), which means they offer a variety of what are essen-
tially banking services to the investor. For example, account holders can write checks
against the account. Debit and/or credit cards may be offered. In addition, instant
loans based on the marginable securities in the account can be obtained for virtu-
ally any purpose, at the current broker’s call money rate plus 0.75 to 2.25 percent.
With a sweep account, the brokerage firm “sweeps” any excess cash in the account
daily and invests it in an interest-earning fund. Although many of these sweep
accounts are federally insured, the interest rates they pay can be incredibly low. For
example, in 2018, a typical rate on a sweep account was 0.15 to 0.25 percent.
Wrap accounts Brokers can act as middlemen, matching clients with independ-
ent money managers. Using the broker as a consultant, the client chooses an out-
side money manager from a list provided by the broker. Under a wrap account, all
Margin Borrowing Bor-
rowing from a brokerage
firm to finance a securities
transaction
Wrap Account A type of
brokerage account where
all costs are wrapped in
one fee
in your regular brokerage account rather than
through the broker who called. Is this ethical
behavior on your part?
Most observers agree that in this situation
you are under no obligation to transact with
the new broker. Had you solicited the recom-
mendation, you would have an obligation, but
in this case you do not. Of course, you may
not receive any more recommendations from
this broker.
Some Practical Advice
You Snooze, You Lose
Investors should pay close attention to what their
brokerage firm is paying in the way of interest
on their sweep account. The brokerage default
account typically pays the lowest rate possible,
and the brokerage firm is unlikely to recommend
alternatives. Brokerage firms can make billions
on the spread between what they pay on their
default sweep account and what they earn invest-
ing the cash balances. However, most firms offer
alternatives that pay higher rates of interest, some
of which are disclosed on their websites. Investors
should be diligent about seeking out these alter-
natives if their cash balances are significant
costs—the cost of the broker-consultant and money manager, transactions costs,
custody fees, and the cost of detailed performance reports—are wrapped in one fee.
For stocks, the fee is 1–3 percent of the assets managed.4
Large brokerage houses such as Merrill Lynch pioneered wrap accounts for
investors with a minimum of $100,000 to commit. Merrill Lynch now offers sev-
eral different types of wrap programs ranging from the traditional consultant wrap
(the placement of client funds with institutional money managers) to a program
where the investor makes the buy and sell decisions and can have unlimited no-
commission trading. Because of their popularity, other financial companies, such as
bank trusts, have begun offering these accounts.
A variation of wrap programs is the mutual fund wrap account, involving an invest-
ment in various mutual funds. Minimum account size requirements are more mod-
est at $10,000 to $100,000. A few mutual fund companies such as Fidelity participate
in this market directly. Fees average 1.1 to 1.4 percent of assets. Mutual fund wrap
accounts are based on an asset allocation model that is updated quarterly to account
for market conditions and client needs. The adviser may decide, for example, to
shift some funds from bonds to stocks.
DRIPs Many companies now offer Dividend Reinvestment Plans (DRIPs). For inves-
tors enrolled in these plans, the company uses the dividends paid on shares owned
to purchase additional shares, either full or fractional. Typically, no brokerage or
administrative fees are involved. The advantages of such plans include dollar cost
averaging, whereby additional shares are purchased over time.
In order to participate in a company’s DRIP, investors often buy the stock through
their brokers, although some companies sell directly to individuals. On becoming
stockholders, investors can join the DRIP and, in addition to the reinvestment of
dividends, invest additional cash at specified intervals.
DRIPs are starting to resemble brokerage accounts. Investors can purchase addi-
tional shares by having money withdrawn from bank accounts periodically, and
shares can even be redeemed by phone at many companies.
As an outgrowth of their DRIPs, a number of companies now offer direct stock
purchase programs (DSPs), which allow investors to invest without a stock broker.
Investors make their initial purchase of stock directly from the company for a small
purchase fee. The price paid typically is based on the closing price of the stock on
designated dates (no limit orders are allowed). The companies selling stock by this
method view it as a way to raise capital without underwriting fees and as a way to
build goodwill with investors.
Treasury bond buyers can also avoid brokers by using the TreasuryDirect Program.
Investors can buy or sell Treasuries by phone or Internet, check account balances
and reinvest as Treasuries mature. Investors eliminate brokerage commissions, but
some fees are involved.
How Orders Work
Trading on Today’s Exchanges
The NYSE was traditionally an agency auction market where agents represented
the public at an auction and the interactions of buyers and sellers determined the
Dividend Reinvestment
Plan (DRIPs) A plan
offered by a company
whereby stockholders
can reinvest dividends in
additional shares of stock
at no cost
4 Fees are lower for bond portfolios or portfolios that are combinations of stocks and bonds.
How Orders Work 119
stock price. Given the enormous volume of shares handled by the NYSE, trading has
become highly automated.
The Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) operates NYSE, which includes the NYSE
and NYSE Amex markets. Designated market makers (DMMs), formerly known as
specialists, have the responsibility for maintaining a fair and orderly market. DMMs
serve as a buffer against market volatility, increase liquidity, and are obligated to
maintain a fair and orderly market for an assigned set of listed firms. The NYSE
features both a physical auction convened by DMMs and a completely automated
auction that includes algorithmic quotes from DMMs and other participants.
ICE includes NYSE Arca, an ECN. The NYSE describes itself as a hybrid market,
offering both an auction path seeking best price and an electronic path seeking the
quickest execution. In effect, NYSE operates two exchanges in the United States—
the NYSE and NYSE Arca—which provide differentiated trading models to meet
different customer needs.
Orders in the Nasdaq Stock Market
Nasdaq, in terms of market share, is the largest U.S. stock exchange. Nasdaq was
the world’s first electronic stock market, and it now operates in more than 70 mar-
ketplaces in 50 countries. Nasdaq consists of a system of securities dealers that are
linked via a telecommunications network.
Market makers (dealers) match the forces of supply and demand by making a
market in certain securities. They do this by standing ready to buy a particular secu-
rity from a seller or sell it to a buyer. Market makers quote bid and asked prices for
each security. The dealer profits from the spread between these two prices.
Assume you place an order for a Nasdaq stock. The brokerage firm will enter it
into the computer system, which will find the best price. Market makers are con-
stantly buying and selling shares and earning the spread, the compensation for act-
ing as a middleman. In effect, they are being paid to make the market.
Modern-Day Trading
Individual investors should think of the financial markets for equities primarily as
the NYSE and Nasdaq because these are the marketplaces that will most often affect
them. However, they should also be aware of some terminology and practices that
affect stock trading.
Algorithmic trading (also called automated trading or algo trading) involves the
use of computer programs to initiate trading orders. A computer algorithm makes
decisions on such details of the order as price, quantity, and timing. The order
is often carried out without human intervention. Large institutional investors fre-
quently use algorithmic trading to break large orders into several smaller orders in
120 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
order to manage the impact of the order on the market. For example, a buy order
for 1 million shares could impact the price of a stock significantly more than five
orders consecutively placed for 200,000 shares each.
High-frequency traders, or “HFT” firms, hold shares for less than a day and some-
times only for minutes. Using the very latest in technology, these firms can execute
trades in fractions of a second in an attempt to gain an advantage over other trad-
ers. HFT firms now account for a large percentage of all volume. HFTs use superfast
computers to view orders placed on the exchange and jump ahead of the original
purchaser. They buy the security and then sell it at a slightly higher price. Institu-
tional investors often complain that such trading makes it difficult for them to trans-
act in large volumes. How are individual investors affected? Buy-and-hold investors
are not affected to any significant degree by this type of trading, except perhaps
psychologically. And when they need to buy or sell, they can easily and inexpensively
do so.
On May 6, 2010, a flash crash occurred in the financial markets. The DJIA
suddenly plunged about 1,000 points on an intraday basis, although it recovered
quickly. Algorithmic trading and HFT have been cited as contributing factors to the
flash crash.
How important is speed to HFTs? Consider this: in 2009, a fiber-optic cable was
laid between New York and Chicago at a cost of approximately $300 million. The
purpose of the cable was to speed up messages sent between the two cities from 17
to 13 milliseconds. This increase in speed was projected to produce annual profits
in the $ billions. A new superspeed fiber-optic cable was laid in 2015 that links New
York with London. What was the motivation for this tremendous expenditure of
time and money? To save 5.2 milliseconds in message speed.
Can it really be worth it to hedge funds, foreign exchange firms, and other types
of traders to pay for the use of this cable to gain that advantage? One estimate is that
a 1-millisecond advantage can be worth $100 million to a hedge fund.
Types of Orders
Investors use three basic types of orders: market orders, limit orders, and stop
orders. Each of these orders is explained in Exhibit 5.1. Briefly,
• A market order ensures that the order will be executed upon receipt, but the
exact price at which the transaction occurs is not guaranteed.
• A limit order ensures that the price specified by the investor will be met or bet-
tered, but execution of the order may be delayed or may not occur.
• A stop order directs that when a stock reaches a specified price, a market
order takes effect, but the exact transaction price is not assured.
Investors can enter limit orders as day orders, which are effective for only
one day, or as good-until-canceled orders or open orders, which remain in
effect for six months unless canceled or renewed. There is no guarantee that
all orders will be filled at a particular price limit when that price is reached
because orders are filled in a sequence determined by the rules of the various
exchanges. 5
Market Order An order to
buy or sell at the best price
available when the order
reaches the trading floor
Limit Order An order to
buy or sell at a specified
(or better) price
Stop Order An order
specifying a certain price
at which a market order
takes effect
5 Limit orders can be filled in part until completed unless the order is specified as all or none (fill the
whole order or no part of it), immediate or cancel (fill the whole order or any part immediately, canceling
the balance), or fill or kill (fill the entire order immediately or cancel it).
How Orders Work 121
Stop orders are used to buy and sell after a stock reaches a certain price level. A
buy stop order is placed above the current market price, while a sell stop order is
placed below the current price. Unlike regular stop orders, a stop limit order auto-
matically becomes a limit order when the stop limit price is reached. Therefore,
stop limit orders specify two prices, the stop price that converts the order into a sell
order and the limit price.
• Use a market order to ensure execution of the order (exact price is not
assured). Use a limit order to ensure a specified price or better (execution
not assured).
Some Practical Advice
As we should expect, certain types of orders
can have both good and bad effects. A sell stop
order calls for a stock to be automatically sold
when the price drops by a specified percentage
or hits a specified price. This can limit losses on
short-term trades and can be effective in locking
in profits. However, the normal volatility of the
market can cause investors to buy at a higher
price and sell at a lower price, only to see the
price rebound and continue upward. Setting the
right price at which the stock is to be sold is criti-
cal, but difficult to do.
EXHIBIT 5.1 | Types of Orders Used by Investors
1. Market orders, the most common type of order,
instruct the broker to buy or sell the security imme-
diately at the best price available. As a representa-
tive of the client, it is incumbent upon the broker
to obtain the best price possible. A market order
ensures that the transaction will be carried out, but
the exact price at which it will occur is not known
until its execution.
2. Limit orders specify a particular price to be met or
bettered. They may result in the customer obtain-
ing a better price than with a market order or in
no transaction occurring because the market price
never reaches the specified limit. The transaction
will occur only if the broker obtains that price or
betters it (lower for a purchase, higher for a sale).
Limit orders can be tried immediately or left with the
broker for a specific time or indefinitely. In turn, the
broker leaves the order with the DMM who enters it
in the limit book.
Example: Assume that the current market price
of a stock is $50. An investor might enter a buy
limit order at $47. If the stock declines to $47, this
limit order, which is on the DMM’s book, will be
executed at $47 or less. Similarly, another investor
might enter a sell limit order for this stock at $55.
If the stock price rises to $55, this investor’s shares
will be sold.
3. Stop orders, which are also commonly called stop-loss
orders, specify a certain price at which a market order
takes effect. For example, a stop order to sell at $50
becomes a market order to sell as soon as the market
price declines to $50. However, the order may not be
filled exactly at $50 because the closest price at which
the stock trades may be $49.95. The exact price spec-
ified in the stop order is therefore not guaranteed
and may not be realized.
Example 1: A sell stop order can be used to pro-
tect a profit in the case of a price decline. Assume
that a stock bought at $32 currently trades at $50.
The investor does not want to limit additional gains
but may wish to protect against a price decline. To
lock in most of the profit, a sell stop order could be
placed at $47.
Example 2: A buy stop order could be used to pro-
tect a profit from a short sale. Assume an investor
sold short at $50, and the current market price of
the stock is $32. A buy stop order placed at, say, $36
would protect most of the profit from the short sale.
122 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
A standard order is a round lot, which is 100 shares or a multiple of 100; an odd
lot is any number of shares between 1 and 99.
Clearing Procedures
Most securities are settled on the regular-way basis, which means they settle on the
normal settlement cycle for the particular investment being traded. The amount
of time between the trade date and the settlement date, however, differs from one
security to another. Equities and municipal bonds have the longest settlement
cycle, which is two business days after the trade date. On the trade date, the parties
agree on the terms of the exchange. On the settlement date, the customer becomes
the legal owner of any securities bought, or gives them up if sold, and must settle
with the brokerage firm. Most customers allow their brokerage firm to keep their
securities in “street name”—that is, the name of the brokerage firm. The customer
receives a monthly statement showing his or her position as to cash, securities held,
any funds borrowed from the broker, and so on.6
Checking Your Understanding
1. Assume you bought a stock for $50 and it has increased to $75. You think
it may go higher, but you want to protect most of your current profit. What
order would you place to ensure a minimum gain of about $23 per share?
2. State two reasons why an investor establishing a brokerage account might
prefer a wrap account to the more traditional asset management account.
Investor Protection in the Securities Markets
Investors should be concerned that securities markets are properly regulated for
their protection. Our financial system depends heavily on confidence in that sys-
tem. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, significant abuses in securities trading
did occur; at the same time, there was a lack of information disclosure, and trading
procedures were not always sound. The market crash in 1929 and the Great Depres-
sion served as catalysts for reforms, which effectively began in the 1930s.
Investor protection can be divided into government regulation, primarily federal,
and self-regulation by the industry. Although states also regulate securities transac-
tions, the primary emphasis is on federal regulation, and so we concentrate on that.
Government Regulation
Federal legislation
Much of the legislation governing the securities markets and industry was initially
enacted during the Great Depression. Many fraudulent and undesirable practices
6 Use of stock certificates as part of the settlement is dying out in the United States. The Depository Trust
Company (DTC) has helped to eliminate stock certificates by placing stock transactions on computers.
Members (brokers and dealers) who own certificates (in street name) deposit them in an account and
can then deliver securities to each other in the form of a bookkeeping entry. This book-entry system, as
opposed to the actual physical possession of securities in either registered or “bearer” form, is essential
to minimize the tremendous amount of paperwork that would otherwise occur with stock certificates.
Investor Protection in the Securities Markets 123
occurred in the 1920s, and the markets as a whole were shattered in the crash of
1929. Congress subsequently sought to improve the stability and viability of the secu-
rities markets by enacting securities regulation in the 1930s. Several additional acts
have been legislated subsequently. Exhibit 5.2 contains a brief description of the
major legislation affecting securities markets.
The securities and exchange commission In 1934, Congress created the Secu-
rities and Exchange Commission (SEC) as an independent, quasijudicial agency of
the U.S. government. Its mission is to administer laws in the securities field and to
protect investors and the public in securities transactions. The commission consists
of five members appointed by the president for five-year terms. Its staff consists of
lawyers, accountants, security analysts, and others divided into divisions and offices
(including eleven regional offices). The SEC has approximately 4,600 employees.
Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) A fed-
eral government agency
established by the Securi-
ties Exchange Act of 1934
to protect investors
EXHIBIT 5.2 | Major Legislation Regulating the Securities Markets
1. The Securities Act of 1933 (the Securities Act) deals
primarily with new issues of securities. The intent
was to protect potential investors in new securities
by requiring issuers to register an issue with full dis-
closure of information. False information is subject
to criminal penalties and lawsuits by purchasers to
recover lost funds.
2. The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 extended the
disclosure requirements to the secondary market
and established the SEC to oversee registration and
disclosure requirements. Organized exchanges are
required to register with the SEC and agree to be
governed by existing legislation.
3. The Maloney Act of 1936 extended SEC control to
the OTC market. It provides for the self-regulation
of OTC dealers through the National Association
of Securities Dealers (NASD), which licenses and
regulates members of OTC firms. The SEC has
authority over the NASD, which must report all its
rules to the SEC.
4. The Trust Indenture Act of 1939 applies to debt secu-
rities that are offered for public sale. Even if debt
securities are registered, they may not be offered to
the public unless the indenture conforms to the Act.
5. The Investment Company Act of 1940 requires
investment companies to register with the SEC and
provides a regulatory framework within which they
must operate. Investment companies are required
to disclose considerable information and to follow
procedures designed to protect their shareholders.
6. The Investment Advisers Act of 1940 requires indi-
viduals or firms who sell advice about investments
to register with the SEC. Registration connotes only
compliance with the law. Almost anyone can become
an investment advisor because the SEC cannot deny
anyone the right to sell investment advice unless it
can demonstrate dishonesty or fraud.
7. The Securities Investor Protection Act of 1970
established the Securities Investor Protection Cor-
poration (SPIC) to act as an insurance company in
protecting investors from brokerage firms that fail.
Assessments are made against brokerage firms to
provide the funds with backup government support
available.
8. The Securities Act Amendments of 1975 was a
far-reaching piece of legislation, calling for the SEC
to move toward the establishment of a national
market. This Act abolished fixed brokerage com-
missions.
9. Fair Disclosure: Regulation FD or Reg FD was adopted
in 2000 and requires that material nonpublic infor-
mation is disclosed broadly to the public, not to
select market professionals.
10. The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 mandates reforms
to enhance corporate responsibility, enhances
financial disclosures, and combats fraud. The Act
created the Public Company Accounting Over-
sight Board.
11. The Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act of 2010 added to the regulatory mea-
sures in the areas of consumer protection, trading
restrictions, credit ratings, financial products, cor-
porate governance, and disclosure.
124 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
In general, the SEC administers all securities laws. Thus, under the Securities Act
of 1933, the SEC ensures that new securities offered for public sale are registered
with the commission, and under the 1934 act it does the same for securities trading
on national exchanges. The registration of securities in no way ensures that inves-
tors purchasing them will not lose money. Registration means only that the issuer
has made adequate disclosure. In fact, the SEC has no power to disapprove securi-
ties for lack of merit.
Under the two acts of 1940—the Investment Company Act and the Investment
Advisers Act—investment companies and investment advisors must register with the
SEC and disclose certain information. The SEC ensures that these two groups meet
the requirements of the laws affecting them. One problem, however, is that the
number of registered investment advisors has increased significantly over the years,
as has the number of investment companies. The SEC has a relatively small staff to
deal with these two groups.
The SEC is required to investigate complaints or indications of violations in secu-
rities transactions. The Justice Department can also investigate alleged abuses in the
financial markets.
The SEC and insider trading A well-known illustration of SEC activity involves
“insider trading,” which has been a primary enforcement emphasis of the SEC.
Insider trading can be defined as a breach of a fiduciary duty while in possession of
material, nonpublic information about a security. “Insiders” (officers and directors
of corporations) are prohibited from misusing (i.e., trading on) corporate informa-
tion that is not generally available to the public and are required to file reports with
the SEC showing their equity holdings.
Several major insider trading “scandals” have been reported over the years.
For example, in late 2011, Raj Rajaratnam, a hedge fund operator, was sentenced
Some Practical Advice
Brokers are obligated to ensure that invest-
ments are “suitable” for their clients. Registered
investment advisers (RIA) act as fiduciaries, and
thus, have a legal requirement to put their clients’
interest ahead of theirs. Registering with the SEC
simply is a notification that an individual is doing
business as an RIA. There are no educational
requirements or other standards. Furthermore,
RIAs do not have to disclose their performance
history to clients; therefore, clients may have no
idea how well a particular RIA has managed
money. Disputes between an RIA and a client
typically must be settled by arbitration, which
can be very costly.
124 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
In general, the SEC administers all securities laws. Thus, under the Securities Act
of 1933, the SEC ensures that new securities offered for public sale are registered
with the commission, and under the 1934 act it does the same for securities trading
on national exchanges. The registration of securities in no way ensures that inves-
tors purchasing them will not lose money. Registration means only that the issuer
has made adequate disclosure. In fact, the SEC has no power to disapprove securi-
ties for lack of merit.
Under the two acts of 1940—the Investment Company Act and the Investment
Advisers Act—investment companies and investment advisors must register with the
SEC and disclose certain information. The SEC ensures that these two groups meet
the requirements of the laws affecting them. One problem, however, is that the
number of registered investment advisors has increased significantly over the years,
as has the number of investment companies. The SEC has a relatively small staff to
deal with these two groups.
The SEC is required to investigate complaints or indications of violations in secu-
rities transactions. The Justice Department can also investigate alleged abuses in the
financial markets.
The SEC and insider trading A well-known illustration of SEC activity involves
“insider trading,” which has been a primary enforcement emphasis of the SEC.
Insider trading can be defined as a breach of a fiduciary duty while in possession of
material, nonpublic information about a security. “Insiders” (officers and directors
of corporations) are prohibited from misusing (i.e., trading on) corporate informa-
tion that is not generally available to the public and are required to file reports with
the SEC showing their equity holdings.
Several major insider trading “scandals” have been reported over the years.
For example, in late 2011, Raj Rajaratnam, a hedge fund operator, was sentenced
Some Practical Advice
Brokers are obligated to ensure that invest-
ments are “suitable” for their clients. Registered
investment advisers (RIA) act as fiduciaries, and
thus, have a legal requirement to put their clients’
interest ahead of theirs. Registering with the SEC
simply is a notification that an individual is doing
business as an RIA. There are no educational
requirements or other standards. Furthermore,
RIAs do not have to disclose their performance
history to clients; therefore, clients may have no
idea how well a particular RIA has managed
money. Disputes between an RIA and a client
typically must be settled by arbitration, which
can be very costly.
In September 2014, the SEC filed charges against a
roommate and a friend of a hedge fund analyst for
insider trading ahead of an announcement that hedge fund Pershing Square
Capital Management had taken a $1 billion short position in Herbalife Ltd.
In the same month, the SEC charged a senior IT professional at Wilson
Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati with insider trading ahead of several mergers and
acquisitions involving firm clients.
Investor Protection in the Securities Markets 125
to 11 years in prison, the longest prison sentence ever for insider trading. The
trend now is for a higher percentage of those found guilty of insider trading to
serve prison terms and for the sentences received to be longer. In the past jail
sentences were often light, a few months, but now they often are for periods of
two to three years.
Although questions remain about exactly what constitutes insider trading, small
investors can, and are, charged with trading on “material, nonpublic information.”
This happens frequently as a result of mergers and takeovers where the individuals
involved are charged with using inside information to trade the stock of a company
about to be acquired. Investors are well advised to be very careful to avoid insider
trading.
Self-Regulation
Regulation of the stock exchange Stock exchanges regulate and monitor trad-
ing for the benefit of investors and the protection of the financial system. The NYSE,
in particular, has a stringent set of self-regulations and declares that it “provides
the most meaningful market regulation in the world.” The NYSE regulates itself
as part of a combined effort involving the SEC, itself, and member firms. Together,
this triad enforces federal legislation and self-regulation for the benefit of the invest-
ing public.
NYSE Regulation, Inc., a subsidiary of NYSE, which is itself part of ICE, is a not-
for- profit corporation which focuses on protecting investors and strengthening
market integrity. NYSE Regulation is independent in its decision making. 7 It seeks
to protect investors by enforcing federal securities laws as well as exchange rules.
NYSE Regulation performs the self-regulatory responsibilities for the NYSE, NYSE
Arca, and NYSE MKT.
During a typical trading day, the NYSE continuously monitors all market par-
ticipants. It also closely monitors the performance of DMMs in their responsibility
for maintaining a fair and orderly market in their assigned stocks. NYSE rules and
regulations are self-imposed and approved by the SEC.
The NYSE has instituted several measures to reduce market volatility and serve
investors’ best interests. These safeguards are referred to as “circuit breakers.” A
“trading halt” is an example of a circuit breaker. A trading halt—which typically lasts
less than an hour—is called during the trading day to allow a company to announce
important news or where there is a significant order imbalance between buyers and
sellers in a security. A trading delay (or “delayed opening”) is called if either of these
situations occurs during after-hours trading.
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), created in 2007, is the
largest regulator for securities firms doing business in the United States. 8 Its over-
sight includes 3,712 securities firms and more than 629,000 registered securities
representatives. FINRA’s objective is to protect investors and ensure market integ-
rity. It accomplishes this objective through both regulation and compliance meas-
ures. FINRA examines securities firms and enforces federal securities laws and also
performs market regulation under contract with certain exchanges.
7 The organization consists of three divisions: Market Surveillance, Enforcement, and Listed Company
Compliance.
8 FINRA is an independent, not-for-profit organization that came about from the consolidation of the
NASD and the member regulation, enforcement, and arbitration functions of the NYSE. It has approxi-
mately 3,400 employees and operates from 20 district offices around the country.
126 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
Other Investor Protections
Insured brokerage accounts The SIPC is a nonprofit membership corpo-
ration overseen by the SEC. It insures each customer account of its member
brokers against brokerage firm failure. Each account is covered for as much as
$500,000. 9 From its creation by Congress in 1970 through December 2017, SIPC
states that it has advanced $2.8 billion in order to make possible the recovery
of $138.7 billion in assets for an estimated 773,000 investors. According to SIPC
data, more than 99 percent of eligible investors have been made whole in the
failed brokerage firm cases it has handled. 10
Mediation and arbitration Investors who have disputes with their brokers gen-
erally cannot seek relief in court. When they open an account, investors pledge to
resolve disputes through mediation or arbitration rather than go to court. When
investors have problems, there are three stages of possible resolution.
First, investors can try to solve the problem with the brokerage firm. The investor
files written claim, providing as much documentation as possible. Also, the claim
should be sent to NASDR, the regulatory arm of the NASD as well as the investor’s
state securities regulator.
The second stage, particularly where compensation or damages is being sought,
is mediation, which is voluntary. NASDR maintains a list of mediators and can
appoint one if requested (investors have veto power over the choice of mediator).
Mediation decisions are nonbinding.
The last stage is arbitration, which is a binding process that can determine dam-
ages. Arbiters can be a person or panel that examines the evidence and makes a
ruling. Arbitration is not free, and investors should probably hire a lawyer.
In general, arbitration rulings cannot be appealed. The few exceptions (such as
bias by the arbitrator) must be appealed within three months. Finally, litigation is
possible, but difficult because of the arbitration clause investors sign. An example
of when this might occur would be cases alleging broker fraud. A suit must be filed
within one year of the alleged incident.
Some Practical Advice
Conflicts between brokers and customers are
inevitable, and investors should take steps to
protect themselves. To get information about
brokerage firms, investors can go to www.finra.org
and click on “FINRA BrokerCheck” under Investor
Resources. State regulators provide Central Reg-
istration Depository reports, which offer disci-
plinary details on financial advisors. Links to state
regulators can be found at nasaa.org (website
for the North American Securities Administrators
Association).
Checking Your Understanding
3. The Securities Act of 1933 ensures investors that every new issue of stock has
met its quality standards and is likely to be a good investment. Agree or disa-
gree, and explain your reasoning.
4. When resolving investor disputes with brokers, what is the major difference
between mediation and arbitration?
Margin
As previously noted, investors often add a borrowing feature to their brokerage
accounts. Doing so requires some deposit of cash or marginable securities. The
NYSE requires that member firms establish a minimum deposit of $2,000 or its equiv-
alent in securities for customers opening a margin account, but individual firms may
require more to simply open an account. For example, Fidelity Brokerage Services
requires $2,500 to open an account, while First Discount Brokerage requires $5,000.
With a margin transaction, the customer pays part of the total amount due and
borrows the remainder from the broker, who in turn typically borrows from a bank.
The bank charges the broker the “broker call rate,” and the broker in turn charges
the customer a “margin interest rate,” which is the broker call rate plus a percentage
added on by the brokerage firm.11 Cash has 100 percent loan value, and most stock
securities have 50 percent loan value.
How Margin Accounts Can Be Used
A margin account can be used to:
1. Purchase additional securities by leveraging the value of the eligible shares
to buy more
2. Borrow money from a brokerage account for personal purposes (the margin
interest rate is comparable to a bank’s prime rate)
3. Provide overdraft protection in amounts up to the loan value of the margin-
able securities for checks written (or debit card purchases)
Margin trading is comparable to a secured loan, with securities serving as collateral.
Investments Intuition
An appeal of margin trading is that it magnifies
the percentage gains on your equity by the
reciprocal of the margin requirement (i.e., 1/
margin percentage; e.g., with a margin of 40
percent, the magnification is 1/0.4 = 2.50). Unfor-
tunately, the use of margin also magnifies the
percentage losses. Regardless of what happens,
the margin trader must pay the interest on the
margin account. An investor considering a mar-
gined stock purchase should remember that the
stock price can go up, remain the same, or go
down. In two of these three cases, the investor
loses. Even if the stock rises, the breakeven point
is higher by the amount of the interest charges.
11 One large discount brokerage firm adds 2 percent for margin loans up to $10,000, 1.5 percent for loans
up to $25,000, 1 percent for loans up to $50,000, and 0.50 percent for loans above $50,000.
128 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
Margin Requirements and Obligations
• Margin is the customer’s equity in a transaction; that is, it is that part of the
total value of the transaction that is not borrowed from the broker.
There are two separate margin requirements. The initial margin requirement must
be met when the transaction is initiated, but the maintenance margin must be met on
an ongoing basis. Failure to meet the latter requirement can result in a margin call.
• An investor must meet both the initial margin requirement and the mainte-
nance margin requirement.
Initial margin The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed), using
Regulation T, has the authority to specify the initial margin. Historically, the initial
margin for stocks has ranged between 40 and 100 percent; it has been 50 percent
since 1974.12 The initial margin can be defined as
Initial margin Amount investor contributes
Value of the trannsaction (5-1)
Maintenance margin In addition to the initial margin, all exchanges and bro-
kers require a maintenance margin below which the actual margin cannot go. The
maintenance margin is the absolute minimum amount of margin (equity) that an
investor must have in the account at all times. Brokers usually require 30 percent or
more on long positions.13
• An investor’s equity is calculated as the market value of the stock minus the
amount borrowed. In turn, the market value of the stock is equal to the cur-
rent stock price multiplied by the number of shares.
If the investor’s equity exceeds the initial margin, the excess margin can be
withdrawn from the account, or more stock can be purchased. Conversely, if the
investor’s equity declines below the initial margin, problems can arise. It is at this
point that the maintenance margin must be considered.
Margin The investor’s
equity in a transaction
Initial Margin In dollar
terms, the initial equity an
investor has in a margin
transaction
Maintenance Margin The
percentage of a transac-
tion’s value that must be
on hand at all times as
equity
12 Exchanges and brokerage houses can require more initial margin than that set by the Fed.
13 The NYSE requires a maintenance margin of 25 percent.
14 With a 60 percent requirement, the customer must initially put up $5,400.
If the initial margin requirement is 50 percent on a
$9,000 transaction (100 shares at $90 per share), an
investor who wants to fully use the margin provision must contribute $4,500,
borrowing $4,500 from the broker. 14 The investor could contribute $4,500 in
cash or deposit $9,000 in marginable securities.
EXAMPLE 5.3
To illustrate the leverage impact, assume that the stock
in Example 5.3 goes up 20 percent from $90 to $108, for
a gain of $1,800. The investor has a $1,800/$4,500 = 40 percent gain on his
or her equity, the actual cash put up by the investor. On the other hand, if
the stock goes down 6 percent to $84.60, a loss of $540, the investor has a
$540/$4,500 = 12 percent loss on his or her equity.
Short Sales 131
selling is simply borrowing a stock, selling it, and replacing it later (hopefully
after a price decline). After all, when you borrow your neighbor’s lawn mower
or power tools, you are expected to bring them back or replace them. The short
seller has an obligation to replace the shorted stock.
The short seller’s broker sells the borrowed security, exactly like any other sale,
to some investor who wishes to own it. The short seller expects the security’s price
to decline. Assume that it does. The short seller instructs the broker to repurchase
the security and cancel the short position (by replacing the borrowed security).
The investor profits by the difference between the price at which the borrowed
stock was sold and the price at which it was repurchased. This process is illustrated
graphically in Figure 5.1 and spelled out in Exhibit 5.3.
You think a particular
stock’s price will
decline
You instruct your
broker to establish a
short position in this
stock
The broker borrows
the shares, sells them,
and credits your
account
The price declines so
you buy the stock
back and replace the
borrowed shares
This closes out your
short position on
which you made a
profit
FIGURE 5.1 The short sale process
EXHIBIT 5.3 | How Short Selling Works
1. You believe that IBM is overpriced at $180 per share.
You do not own IBM stock but wish to profit if your
belief is correct and the price goes down.
2. You instruct your broker to short 100 shares of IBM,
a transaction valued at $18,000 (ignore brokerage
costs). The broker does this by borrowing the 100
shares from another investor’s account and selling
the shares on your behalf at $18,000.
3. The sale proceeds of $18,000 are credited to your
margin account because you sold the stock. You
must put up 50 percent of the borrowed amount, or
$9,000 as initial margin. You are now responsible for
paying back 100 shares of IBM stock to replace the
100 shares that were borrowed on your behalf.
4. Assume IBM’s price goes to $100 three months later. You
are now ahead $8,000 because you can buy the shares
for $10,000 and replace the 100 shares you borrowed.
5. Having closed out the short sale, you regain access to
the $9,000 margin you contributed.
6. Should the price of IBM rise, you have two choices.
One, buy the stock back and close out the position,
taking a loss. For example, buying back at $200 would
result in a loss of $2,000. Two, continue to hold the
position and hope the price eventually drops. In the
case of a rising stock price for a short position, you
may face a margin call requiring cash or equivalents
equal to 25 to 35 percent of the stock’s value. Exact
maintenance margin requirements vary by firm.
132 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
Several technicalities are involved in a short sale; these are outlined in Exhibit 5.4.
For example, there is no time limit on how long an investor can remain short in a
stock, and any dividends paid on the stock during the time the seller is short must
be covered by the short seller.
Keep in mind that to sell short an investor must be approved for a margin
account because short positions involve the potential for margin calls. For exam-
ple, the initial minimum equity to open a Fidelity margin account is $2,500, the
initial margin requirement would be 50 percent of the short sale, and the main-
tenance margin would be 30 percent of market value (the absolute minimum to
open a margin account is $2,000 in cash or securities). That is, the maintenance
requirements for short sales are 100 percent of the current market value of the
short sale plus (typically) 30 percent of the total market value of the securities
in the margin account. Should the price of the security shorted rise enough, an
investor will be required by the broker to put more cash in the account or sell
some securities. 17
17 It is possible for investors to get caught in a “short squeeze.” As a stock continues to rise in price,
short sellers start buying to cover their positions, pushing the price even higher. Short sellers can
actually create significant run-ups in the stock price, thereby causing the opposite of what they are
trying to achieve. Brokers, in turn, may force the short sellers to cover their short positions if the
price is rising dramatically. One way for short sellers to protect themselves against this is to use a buy
stop order.
18 Note that Ashley knows nothing about this transaction, nor is she really affected. Ashley receives a
monthly statement from the broker showing ownership of 100 shares of GM. Should Ashley wish to sell
the GM stock while Erica is short the stock, the broker will simply borrow 100 shares from a third inves-
tor’s account that holds GM stock. It is important to note that all of these transactions are book entries
and do not typically involve actual stock certificates.
19 Notice that two trades are required to complete a transaction, or “round trip.” Investors who purchase
securities plan to sell them eventually. Investors who sell short plan to buy back eventually; they have
simply reversed the normal buy–sell procedure by selling and then buying.
Assume Erica believes that the price of General Motors
(GM) will decline over the next few months and wants
to profit if her assessment is correct. She calls her broker with instructions
to sell 100 shares of GM short (she does not own GM) at its current price
of $30 per share. The broker borrows 100 shares of GM from Ashley, who
has a brokerage account with the firm and currently owns GM (“long”).
The broker sells the borrowed 100 shares at $30 per share, crediting the
$3,000 proceeds (less commissions, which we ignore for this example) to
Erica’s account. 18 Six months later the price of GM has declined, as Erica
predicted, and is now $25 per share. Satisfied with this drop in price, Erica
instructs the broker to purchase 100 shares of GM and close out the short
position. Her profit is $3,000–$2,500 or $500. The broker replaces Ashley’s
missing stock with the just-purchased 100 shares, and the transaction is
complete. 19
EXAMPLE 5.8
Short Sales 133
Selling Short as an Investor
Short sellers argue that short sales help the overall market because they provide
liquidity and help smooth out the highs and lows in stock prices. And, of course, there
have been many periods in the stock market when prices did not rise, but instead fell.
During such periods, short selling might be a good strategy for some investors.
Some investors argue that a portfolio consisting of both long and short positions
can dampen volatility while still producing good returns. Some evidence suggests
that a portfolio holding positions that are 65 percent long and 35 percent short is
half as volatile as a portfolio that is 100 percent long.20
If you are interested in selling stocks short, how do you go about obtaining
short sale recommendations? Investors can do their own analysis or use investment
advisory services. When you perform your own analysis, which types of companies
EXHIBIT 5.4 | The Details of Short Selling
1. Dividends declared on any stock sold short must be
covered by the short seller. After all, the person from
whom the shares were borrowed still owns the stock
and expects all dividends it pays.
2. Short sellers must have a margin account to sell short
and must put up margin as if they had gone long. The
margin can consist of cash or securities held long.
3. The net proceeds from a short sale, plus the required
margin, are held by the broker; thus, no funds are
immediately received by the short seller. The lender
must be fully protected. To do this, the account is
marked to market. If the stock price declines as
expected by the short seller, he or she can withdraw
the difference between the sale price and the current
market price. If the stock price rises, however, the
short seller may have to put up more funds.
4. There is no time limit on a short sale. Short sellers
can remain short indefinitely. The only exception
arises when the lender of the securities wants them
back. In most cases, the broker can borrow else-
where, but in some situations, such as a thinly traded
stock, this may not be possible.
Assume an investor shorts 100 shares of Microsoft at
$100 per share. The investor must have $5,000 in the
account (initial margin of 50 percent). The proceeds of the short sale are left
in the account, making the total initial margin requirement $15,000 ($10,000
proceeds +$5,000 margin). If Microsoft rises to $110, the short sale value is now
$11,000, and the maintenance margin is now 30 percent of that, or $3,300, for
a total margin requirement of $14,300. Because the investor started with a total
margin requirement of $15,000, no action is necessary. Now assume the price of
Microsoft goes to $140. The short sale value is now $14,000, and the maintenance
margin is now 30 percent of that, or $4,200. The total margin requirement is
now $18,200, generating a margin call for an additional cash deposit of $3,200
(recall that the investor started with $15,000 after selling the stock short and
putting up 50 percent of the value of the transaction as collateral).
134 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
should you look for to sell short? It makes sense to focus on companies in declining
industries, companies that are in the news for possible fraudulent activity, compa-
nies with declining financial situations, and, perhaps most commonly, companies
whose earnings are disappointing the market. As for advisory services, the results
of those who provide recommendations vary over a wide range. And as you would
expect, there are many more investment advisory services making buy recommen-
dations than sell recommendations.
The financial crisis that began in 2008 was not a crisis for
everyone. David Einhorn from Greenlight Capital made
a fortune during the financial crisis. Einhorn shorted the investment bank
Lehman Brothers in July of 2007 when the stock was selling for over $70 per
share. The share price steadily declined over the next 10 months to around
$35 per share when he publicly announced his short position at a large NYC
investment conference in May of 2008. On the day of his speech, Lehman’s
stock closed down an additional $2.44 per share. Lehman, which before the
crisis was the fourth largest investment bank in the United States, filed for
bankruptcy in September 2008.
EXAMPLE 5.10
Concepts in Action
Do You Want to Be a Short Seller?
Frequently stock prices escalate for glamour
companies before their earnings take hold. For
example, think of Tesla and the slew of mari-
juana stocks. When this happens, some inves-
tors become motivated to take short positions
in the stocks. How popular is this activity, and
what exactly is involved? First, short selling as a
percentage of total volume on the NYSE is small.
Clearly, most investors are not selling short. Part of
the reason is the mechanics involved. Short sellers
must put up 50 percent of the short sale as col-
lateral for the initial margin requirement and then
meet ongoing margin requirements. They must
also replace any dividends paid on the stock
while the short position is open. Finally, there is
the widely stated note of caution to investors that
while potential gains from short selling are limited,
potential losses are not.
The financial crisis that began in 2008 was a
short seller’s dream for those who recognized
the situation and acted accordingly. Markets
declined sharply, and many stocks collapsed.
A number of financial stocks went bankrupt,
with the price essentially going to zero. Even the
big-name financial stocks dropped dramatically.
For example, Lehman Brothers and Bear Stearns,
which were both investment banking behemoths,
failed during the financial crisis. This was the best
environment for short selling in many years.
Some short sellers can encounter a so-called
short squeeze. This occurs when there is an excess
demand for a stock but a lack of supply, which
drives up the stock price. If a stock starts to rise
rapidly, many short sellers may choose to cover
their position and get out. As more short sellers
buy back the stock, the stock price rises even
more. Short squeezes are more likely with smaller
capitalization stocks with relatively fewer shares
outstanding. Consider the case of Volkswagon
(VW) in 2008. VW was selling at a price beyond
what many investors thought was warranted,
so they established a rather large short position
in the stock. However, Porsche and a few other
institutions had accumulated virtually all of VW’s
outstanding shares. When VW’s stock price started
rising, these institutions were unwilling to sell their
shares. The resulting short squeeze pushed VW’s
price from the low $200s to the $1,000 range in
just a couple days. Finally, if you plan to sell short,
remember the old Wall Street ditty: “He who sells
what isn’t his’n/Buys it back or goes to prison.”
Summary 135
Short interest ratio Is it possible to measure how bearish investors are about a
stock? The short interest ratio is calculated for a stock by dividing the number of
shares sold short by the average daily trading volume. It indicates the number of
days it would take for short sellers to buy back (cover) all of the shares sold short.
The higher the ratio, the more bearish investors are about a stock’s prospects. Some
studies suggest that there is a strong negative relationship between short interest
and subsequent stock returns, indicating that high short interest conveys negative
information about future stock performance.
Checking Your Understanding
5. Why is it necessary for brokerage accounts to be marked to market every
day?
6. Why sell short instead of using puts?
7. What does it mean to say the losses from short selling are infinite while the
gains are finite?
Summary
• Brokerage firms consist of full-service brokers and discount brokers.
• Full-service stockbrokers earn their incomes from a variety of sources, includ-
ing individuals’ trades, in-house mutual fund sales, principal transactions, new
issues, and fees.
• With a cash brokerage account, the customer pays in full on the settlement
date, whereas with a margin account money can be borrowed from the broker
to finance purchases.
• Asset management accounts offering a variety of services are commonplace.
With a wrap account, brokers, acting as middlemen, match clients with money
managers. All costs—the cost of the broker-consultant and money man-
ager, transactions costs, custody fees, and the cost of detailed performance
reports—are wrapped in one fee.
• Brokerage commissions are negotiable. Full-line brokerage houses charge
more than discount brokers but offer recommendations and research.
Internet- only discount brokers typically charge the least.
• Investors can invest without a broker through dividend reinvestment plans.
Some companies sell shares directly to investors.
• The stock exchanges are highly automated, allowing billions of shares to be
traded.
• Market orders are executed at the best price available, whereas limit orders
specify a particular price to be met or bettered. Stop orders specify a certain
price at which a market order is to take over.
• Investor protection includes government regulation, primarily federal, and
self-regulation by the industry. The Securities and Exchange Commission
administers the securities laws.
• The major exchanges have a stringent set of self-regulations. The Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), created in 2007, is now the largest
regulator for all securities firms doing business in the United States.
Short-Interest Ratio The
ratio of total shares sold
short to average daily
trading volume
136 Chapter 5 How Securities Are Traded
• Margin is the equity an investor has in a transaction. The Federal Reserve
sets the initial margin, but all exchanges and brokers require a maintenance
margin. Margin can magnify any gains on a transaction, but it can also magnify
losses.
• An investor sells short if a security’s price is expected to decline. The investor
borrows the securities sold short from the broker, hoping to replace them
through a later purchase at a lower price.
