57CHAPTER 3
As you consider your investing
alternatives for your inheritance,
you decide to seriously consider
mutual funds and exchange-traded
funds (ETFs) as a significant part
of your strategy. Why? Like many
people, you hear a lot about them
because they are so widely owned by
individual investors. Furthermore,
the financial press is continually
touting how well one or more funds
did last quarter or last year. Some of
your friends own mutual funds and
ETFs and have been pleased with
them. Moreover, you understand
that investing in funds will relieve
you of the day-to-day investment
decision-making that you would
otherwise be faced with. So, what’s
the catch? If mutual funds and ETFs
have all these pluses, why don’t peo-
ple opt for them and minimize or
even forego direct investing altogether? It’s a good question, and one we will con-
sider in this chapter.
You have probably been hearing a lot about ETFs, and you feel that you need
to learn about them. They are an increasingly popular alternative to mutual
funds, and you do not want to be left out. Finally, in order to impress your friends
with your knowledge, you should know at least a little about hedge funds, which
are frequently in the news. It is wise to learn about these dynamic organizations
because at some point in the future, you may have an opportunity to work for a
hedge fund.
As you will see, you can make a strong case for using index mutual funds and/
or ETFs as your complete portfolio, saving the cost of a financial advisor or the cost
of an actively managed mutual fund. On a $1 million portfolio, such savings could
easily amount to $20,000 or more. Could you use a windfall of $20,000 per year you
were not expecting?
Chapter 2 was primarily concerned with direct investing, meaning investors make
trade decisions regarding securities, typically in a brokerage account. The inves-
tor makes the decisions and controls the actions involving the investments. This
Indirect Investing
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Identify the forms of indirect invest-
ing available to individual investors
and discuss their advantages and
disadvantages.
• Distinguish between closed-end
funds, mutual funds, exchange-
traded funds, and exchange-traded
notes.
• Evaluate key features of mutual
funds, such as the sales charge,
the management fee, and the net
asset value.
• Know how to use exchange-traded
funds, mutual funds, and hedge
funds to get asset exposure.
62 Chapter 3 Indirect Investing
portfolios are typically unmanaged, they have much lower annual expense ratios
than actively managed mutual funds.
Well-known ETFs Let’s consider some popular equity ETFs. Most ETFs have three
letters as their ticker symbol, and some have popular “nicknames.” Probably the best-
known ETF is the “Spider” (Standard & Poor’s Depositary Receipts), which has the
ticker SPY. Spiders were introduced in 1993 to track the S&P 500 Index and had a
value of $6.5 million when launched. As of 2018, the spider had over $250 billion of
assets. Other popular ETFs include “Diamonds,” which track the Dow Jones Indus-
trial Average (its ticker is DIA), and “Cubes,” which tracks the NASDAQ 100 Index
and has the ticker QQQ. Many large investment firms, such as Barclays Capital, JP
Morgan, Russell, Standard & Poor’s, and Vanguard, offer their own ETFs. There are
ETFs that track virtually any conceivable investment including the various categories
of equities and bonds, money market securities, real estate, and commodities.
ETF tax efficiency A particularly appealing feature of ETFs is their tax efficiency,
particularly relative to mutual funds. The major difference in tax treatment comes
with respect to capital gains, not dividend or interest income. With ETFs, inves-
tors decide when to sell fund shares and realize a capital gain or loss. In contrast,
shareholders in mutual funds have no control over the amount of capital gains dis-
tributions their funds may pass through in a given year. If a mutual fund sells shares
during a year at a gain, the capital gains are passed through to the fund’s sharehold-
ers. In 2008, for example, many mutual funds made large capital gains distributions
to shareholders as they sold shares that had appreciated over prior years. Therefore,
in 2008, their shareholders faced large tax bills at the same time their funds’ shares
declined with the sharp decline in the stock market.14
The following two ETFs reflect the variety of ETFs in
existence. The Vanguard Total Stock Market ETF (VTI)
seeks to provide long-term growth of capital and income by investing in more
than 3,500 stocks representative of the entire U.S. market. This fund charges
a 0.04 percent expense ratio. The iShares Silver Trust ETF (SLV) seeks to
replicate the performance of the price of silver and holds physical silver as its
underlying asset. The fund’s expense ratio is 0.50 percent.
EXAMPLE 3.2
Some Practical Advice
On the Trail of ETFs
Given the popularity of ETFs, numerous informa-
tional sources are available. A few examples are
mentioned here, but there are many more. An
ETF center can be found at finance.yahoo.com.
Invesco PowerShares features more than 140
exchange-traded funds and offers a wide range
of focused ETFs. Information about the funds
can be found at www.invescopowershares.com.
Morningstar has an entire section devoted to
ETFs at its website, www.morningstar.com. Finally,
a large amount of information about ETFs can be
found at etf.about.com.
14 This tax inefficiency issue tends to become most prominent during a period when a mutual fund has
had a large run-up in value, which is subsequently followed by a fairly rapid price decline. As the fund’s
shareholders redeem shares, the fund is forced to sell underlying shares and realize capital gains, which
are passed through to current shareholders. Therefore, mutual fund investors should be careful not to
buy into a large existing capital gain in a fund.
ETF growth trends Until Summer 2002, all ETFs involved equity securities.
Currently, ETFs are available covering various bond segments as well as real
estate, currencies, gold, and other commodities. As of 2017, there were approxi-
mately 1,570 ETFs, with about $3.3 trillion in assets. Although this is small
compared to the assets in mutual funds, the growth rate in ETF assets has
been very rapid as more and more investors discover the advantages offered
by ETFs.
A new development in the ETF market is the creation of actively managed ETFs.
In 2018, there were approximately 200 such funds with $45 billion in assets.
ETFs versus ETNs
What’s the difference between an ETF and an ETN? It is much more than a single
letter. As noted previously, ETF stands for exchange-traded fund, while an ETN is an
exchange-traded note. As the name indicates, an ETN represents a debt security (an
unsecured note). It is common, however, for financial publications and investors to
discuss the two as basically interchangeable investment options.
ETFs and ETNs are similar in that both are designed to track an underlying asset,
both have relatively low expense ratios, and both trade on major exchanges. The
similarity in the two instruments is highlighted by the following example. United
States Oil Fund (USO) is an ETF that has an investment objective of tracking the
price of West Texas crude oil, whereas iPath S&P Oil Fund (OIL) is an ETN that has
an investment objective of tracking the price of West Texas crude oil. Did you notice
that the two objectives are identical?
The primary difference between the two is that as an ETN, OIL represents a
promissory note (unsecured debt) whose payment is based on the price of West
Texas crude oil. The fund is obligated to make a payment that appreciates at the
same rate as the oil price. In contrast, as an ETF, USO represents an ownership
claim on underlying securities that the fund has packaged such that they will move
directly with the price of oil, for example, oil futures contracts.
Overall, an ETF represents an ownership claim on underlying securities that
are held by the fund, whereas an ETN represents a debt security that is issued
by a fund. Thus, ETNs carry the credit quality of the issuer of the fund. If the
fund company fails, the ETN investors face possible loss of investment. There are
also some minor technical differences between ETFs and ETNs that may affect
taxation.
Some Practical Advice
Investors Need to Use Caution When
It Comes to ETFs
With assets of roughly $3.3 trillion, ETFs are
obviously popular. As more are created, inves-
tors need to ask some hard questions. Should
they really be investing in ETFs that are narrowly
focused on asset classes such as palladium,
or Belgium equities, or small stocks in Hong
Kong? Even worse, leveraged ETFs and inverse
leveraged ETFs have been created to magnify
movements of asset prices two and three times.
For complex technical reasons, these funds are
intended to be used as very short-term hedg-
ing devices, but some investors have held them
for extended periods and generated large
losses. Investors can expect to see more new ETF
products in the future, some with, at best, only
marginal value.
64 Chapter 3 Indirect Investing
Mutual Funds (Open-End Investment Companies)
The following facts about mutual funds illustrate their importance to investors:
• The growth in mutual fund investment across households has been tremen-
dous. In 2018, more than 45 percent of households in the United States owned
mutual funds, whereas in 1980 it was only 1 in 20.
• Mutual funds owned approximately 29 percent of U.S. stocks at the end of
2018, and since they are simply intermediaries between households and equi-
ties, this represents a significant household investment in equities.
Clearly, the fact that so many people have chosen to invest using mutual funds
documents their overall importance when it comes to indirect investing. The poten-
tial benefits of mutual funds to investors are illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Diversification may be the most important reason for buying a typical mutual
fund. Diversifying one’s portfolio is crucial for investor long-term investment per-
formance. Many investors cannot build a diversified portfolio on their own because
of the amount of money involved to do so. Most mutual funds provide instant
diversification.
Mutual funds provide professional managers to handle investor portfolios. It
seems logical that they are able to effectively manage portfolios since that is their
Investments Intuition
Given the rapid growth in the number of ETFs
and the narrow specialization that many pursue,
it may come as no surprise to realize that a
number of these funds go out of business.
Although there is no precise number, it is
believed that funds with assets of less than $50
million may not be profitable to operate. In one
recent year, slightly less than half of all ETFs and
ETNs had assets less than $50 million. To dissolve
itself, a fund can liquidate and return money to
shareholders at net asset value. Alternatively, it
can merge with another fund.
70 Chapter 3 Indirect Investing
EXHIBIT 3.2 | Investment Style for Fidelity’s Equity-Income Fund
SOURCE: On-line Prospectus for Equity-Income Fund, with permission of Morningstar, Inc.
GrowthBlendValue
Large
Mid
Small
Current
Historical
EXHIBIT 3.1 | Mutual Fund Investment Objectives
The Investment Company Institute (ICI) catego-
rizes U.S. mutual funds according to five alternative
classifications, ranging from broad (Level 1 contains
two categories) to refined (Level 5 contains 42 cate-
gories). ICI’s Level 4 categorization includes the follow-
ing 13 investment classifications.
EQUITY FUNDS
• Capital appreciation funds seek capital appreciation;
dividends are not a primary consideration.
• Total return funds seek a combination of current
income and capital appreciation.
• World equity funds invest primarily in stocks of for-
eign companies.
HYBRID FUNDS
• Hybrid funds invest in a mix of equity and fixed-
income securities.
TAXABLE BOND FUNDS
• Investment grade funds seek current income by
investing primarily (65 percent) in investment-grade
debt securities.
• High-yield funds seek current income by investing
two-thirds or more of their portfolios in lower-rated
corporate bonds (Baa or lower by Moody’s and BBB
or lower by Standard & Poor’s rating services).
• Government bond funds pursue an objective of high
current income by investing in taxable bonds issued,
or backed, by the U.S. government.
• Multisector bond funds seek to provide high current
income by investing predominantly in a combination
of domestic securities including mortgage-backed
securities and high-yield bonds and may invest up to
25 percent in bonds issued by foreign entities.
• World bond funds seek current income by investing
in the debt securities of foreign companies and gov-
ernments.
TAX-EXEMPT BOND FUNDS
• National municipal bond funds invest in a national
mix of municipal bonds with the objective of provid-
ing high after-tax yields.
• State municipal bond funds invest primarily in
municipal bonds issued by a single state. The bonds
are exempt from federal income tax as well as state
taxes for residents of that state.
MONEY MARKET FUNDS
• Taxable money market funds seek to maintain a sta-
ble NAV by investing in short-term, high-grade securi-
ties sold in the money market. The average maturity
of their portfolios is limited to 60 days or less.
• Tax-exempt money market funds seek income that
is not taxed by the federal government, and in some
cases states and municipalities, by investing in munic-
ipal securities with relatively short maturities. The
average maturity of their portfolios is limited to 60
days or less.
SOURCE: 2014 Investment Company Fact Book, Copyright
© 2014 by the Investment Company Institute (www.ici.org).
Reprinted with permission.
Value funds and growth funds tend to perform well at different times because
value stocks and growth stocks perform well at different times, each having its
own cycle.
A more risk-averse investor worrying about a market decline may wish to empha-
size value funds, while more aggressive investors seeking good performance in an
expected market rise would probably favor growth funds. Given the evidence on
efficient markets discussed in Chapter 12, the best strategy is probably to buy both
types of funds.
Index funds Mutual funds designed to replicate a market index such as the
S&P 500 are called index funds. The first index fund, Vanguard’s 500 Index
Fund, was started in 1976 by John Bogle (former CEO of Vanguard), and it
is now one of the largest mutual funds in terms of assets. In 1990, there were
only 15 index mutual funds, and by 2018, there were 453 index mutual funds
with assets totaling $3.4 trillion. Index funds cover a wide variety of indexes,
both domestic and international and both debt and equity. However, 33 per-
cent of the assets in index mutual funds are indexed to the S&P 500 Index. The
majority of index fund assets are in funds sold directly to investors by mutual
fund companies (such as Vanguard and Fidelity) as opposed to being sold
indirectly through financial advisers such as brokerage firms. Equity index
funds accounted for 26.6 percent of all equity mutual fund assets at the begin-
ning of 2018.
• An index fund is an unmanaged portfolio of securities designed to match some
market index; it typically has a low-expense ratio.
Index funds have lower expenses because they are “unmanaged” funds seeking
only to duplicate the chosen index. While the typical actively managed equity fund
has annual operating expenses of approximately 1.25 percent of assets, the typical
index fund has expenses of only 0.61 percent, and Vanguard’s 500 Index Fund has
an amazingly low expense rate of 0.04 percent.
How have index funds fared in recent years? Over a recent 20-year period,
the average actively managed large-cap fund realized 1.7 percentage points less
than the S&P 500 Index on an annual basis. Therefore, S&P 500 index funds
outperformed these actively managed funds. Of the actively managed funds in
operation since 1976, only one in four has managed to outperform Vanguard’s
500 Index Fund.
Index Funds Mutual
funds holding a bond or
stock portfolio designed to
match a particular market
index
The relative performance of value stocks versus growth
stocks fluctuates considerably over time. The difference
in performance between the two (value stock return minus growth stock
return) is generally labeled the value premium. Between 2000 and 2018, one
measure of the premium averaged 3.4 percent but ranged from a high of 39.7
percent in 2000 to a low of −14.7 percent in 2007.
72 Chapter 3 Indirect Investing
Checking Your Understanding
3. Why are MMFs the safest type of mutual fund an investor can hold?
4. Why might investors prefer a hybrid fund to either a stock fund or a bond fund?
5. Why is it reasonable to expect growth funds and value funds to perform well
over different periods of time?
The Net Asset Value per Share
Net asset value (NAV) is the per share value of the securities in a fund’s portfolio.
It is computed daily after the markets close at 4 p.m. by calculating the total market
value of the securities in the portfolio, subtracting any liabilities, and dividing by the
number of investment company fund shares outstanding.
NAV Market value of a fund s securities liabilities
Number
’
oof investor shares outstanding
Federal law requires that a fund’s NAV be calculated for each business day.
• The NAV of any fund—mutual fund, closed-end fund, or ETF—is the per
share value of securities held on a given day. It changes daily as the value of the
securities held changes and as expenses for operating the fund are deducted
and income from the securities held is received and distributed.
Net Asset Value
(NAV) The per share
value of the securities in
an investment company’s
portfolio
Some Practical Advice
Investors buying mutual funds have several
sources from which to choose, and therein lies
the danger. One study found that mutual funds
run by insurance companies underperform other
funds. On average, shareholders fell behind by
1.5 percentage points a year.24
Investors can buy no-load funds from the
companies themselves or buy through a broker.
Half of all investment in mutual funds is made
through brokers. However, a recent study finds
that “[f]unds sold by brokers underperform
those sold through the direct channel.”25 Inves-
tors in one recent year paid some $15 billion
in sales charges and distribution fees alone
(management fees were $24 billion).
There are numerous index funds today, and
expenses vary widely. Investors need to perform
due diligence when selecting a fund to be sure
that the expenses are reasonable. After all, if the
Vanguard fund can match the S&P 500 Index
with an expense ratio of 0.04 percent, why pay
0.50 percent, or 0.70 percent, to do the same
thing? In fact, excluding Vanguard, the average
S&P 500 index fund charges 0.82 percent. Fur-
thermore, total costs for index funds can be
amazingly large. For example, one well-known
S&P 500 Index Fund has an expense ratio of
0.60 and also charges a 5.25 percent load
charge. To accomplish the same thing as Van-
guard’s S&P 500 Index Fund, why would you give
up 5.25 percent of your money off the top and
pay an annual expense ratio 15 times larger
than Vanguard’s?
Bottom line: Investors should think carefully
about where and how they buy their mutual
funds
Investment Company Performance 79
Given a choice, you should have picked the Utilities Select Sector SPDR. Why?
When dividends are included, the utilities ETF returned 84 percent versus 81 per-
cent for the small stock ETF. There is a big difference between price appreciation
and total return.
Throughout this text we use the term “return” to represent total return (TR), which
measures the return from any financial asset, including a mutual fund or ETF. Total
return for a fund includes both cash distributions and capital gains/losses, and there-
fore, includes all of the ways investors make money from financial assets. It is stated as
a percentage and can cover any time period—one month, one year, or multiple years.
• Total return measures both the income component of an investment, and any
price change, for a specified period of time.32
Average annual return Standard practice in the investment company industry is
to calculate and present the average annual total return, a hypothetical return that,
if achieved annually, produces the same cumulative total return as if performance
was constant over the entire period. The average annual total return is another
name for the geometric mean and reflects the compound rate of growth at which money
grows over time.
The average annual return for a fund shows the compound annual return
at which money grew over time. Given some initial investment (e.g., $10,000 or
$100,000) and the average annual total return for a mutual fund or ETF, we can
easily determine one’s ending wealth as a result of investing in that particular fund
for a specified number of years.
Average Annual Total
Return A hypothetical
return used by mutual
funds that, if achieved
annually, produces the
same cumulative total
return if performance had
been constant over the
entire period
The average annual returns for the Titan Equity Fund
and its corresponding market benchmark for several
recent years were as follows:
1 Year 3 Years 5 Years 10 Years
Titan equity fund 11.29% 6.21% 4.31% 11.94%
Market benchmark 16.94 9.16 6.10 13.84
Therefore, investing $10,000 in the Titan Fund and compounding at 11.94
percent for 10 years would produce a final wealth of $30,892.50. To make the
calculation, convert 11.94 percent to a decimal, add 1.0, and raise 1.1194 to
the 10th power. Finally, multiply this result, 3.08925, by the $10,000 to obtain
$30,892.50:
1 1194 10 000 30 892 50
10
. , , .$ $
Financial calculator method of calculation:
Using the keys: N I/YR PV FV
Enter the values: 10 11.94 10,000 ?
(NOTE: enter 10, press N, enter 11.94, press I/YR, enter 10,000, press PV, and finally compute FV).
Pressing compute and then the FV button produces the answer, $30,892.50.
EXAMPLE 3.13
32 As shown in Chapter 6,
TR cash payments received
purchase price
price change over tthe period
purchase price
80 Chapter 3 Indirect Investing
Using average annual returns allows investors to make direct comparisons among
funds as to their performance. In making fund comparisons, investors also need to
consider the risk of the funds, and the funds should have the same general objec-
tives. For example, we expect, on average, that equity funds will outperform bond
funds and MMFs.
While average returns are important, they do not tell you everything. Many
investors want to know how a fund performs when there is a sharp market decline.
A fund that is said to be defensive should hold up relatively well during periods
of poor market performance. Clearly, a fund should fit well with an investor’s
objectives and other portfolio holdings, and remember costs are very important in
affecting a fund’s performance and should be carefully considered.
Tax efficiency The issue of tax efficiency is an important feature when consid-
ering a mutual fund. Fund shareholders can end up paying significant taxes in a
particular year regardless of the fund’s performance. In fact, a fund’s performance
in one year can be negative while shareholders receive large distributions on which
they must pay taxes. Typically, funds with relatively low portfolio turnover tend to
be more tax efficient.
Morningstar Ratings
One of the best-known assessments of fund performance among investors is the rat-
ing system developed by Morningstar, the well-known provider of information about
investment companies. Morningstar uses a five-star rating system, with five stars rep-
resenting the highest rating and one star the lowest. The “star” system has become
very well known among investors. Many investment companies run advertisements
to tout any funds they manage that achieve high ratings, particularly five stars.
Morningstar ratings have been widely used by investors as a quick screening
device, believing that the rating is a likely predictor of future success. However, it is
important to note that this rating system is measuring historical risk-adjusted perfor-
mance for funds that have at least a three-year history. The ratings take into account
a fund’s risk and return relative to its category as a whole.
The top 10 percent of performers receive five stars, the next 22.5 percent receive
four stars, and the middle 35 percent receive three stars. Morningstar ranks funds
against comparable funds. For example, large-company value funds are ranked
against other large-company value funds.33
Janus Venture Fund, a successful equity fund, had a return
of −45 percent for the year 2000. However, in 2000, it
paid out $16.38 per share as a result of selling securities that had appreciated
substantially. Therefore, shareholders in this fund faced a significant tax
liability for 2000 while suffering a 45 percent loss for the year. You talk about
adding insult to injury.
EXAMPLE 3.14
33 The Morningstar ranking system takes into account a fund’s load charges by calculating a load-adjusted
return. Because each share class of a fund is rated separately, one class of shares can have a different rat-
ing than another class of shares although the same mutual fund is being evaluated.
Investment Company Performance 81
• Morningstar’s star ratings are not intended to predict future performance or
a fund’s quality.
In November 2011, Morningstar announced a forward-looking ranking system
for mutual funds that supplements the star rating system. While the latter measures
past performance, the new system attempts to predict which funds will outperform
in the future. It incorporates not only past performance but also the expense ratio,
the fund’s investing strategy, and other information concerning the fund’s manager
and parent company. New rating designations are gold, silver, bronze, neutral, and
negative.
Benchmarks
Investors should relate a mutual fund’s performance to some benchmark in order
to judge relative performance. Fidelity’s Equity-Income Fund was compared to the
S&P 500 Composite Index. Other firms make different comparisons and claims, as
one will quickly discover by looking at fund ads. For example, T. Rowe Price, in not-
ing that its Dividend Growth Fund had a five-star Morningstar rating for overall risk-
adjusted performance, compared its fund to the Lipper Growth and Income Funds
Average. The Kaufmann Fund, on the other hand, a well-known small company
aggressive growth fund, compared its performance to the Russell 2000, an index of
small companies.
Fund Performance and Expenses
An important issue for all fund investors is that of expenses. The fees and annual
expenses deducted for operating a fund can have a big impact on an investor’s net
return.
John Bogle, founder of Vanguard and a well-known critic of many mutual fund
practices, estimates that the average actively managed mutual fund actually costs
investors approximately 2.5 percentage points in performance when all expenses
are properly accounted for. Obviously, that contrasts sharply with the expenses for
ETFs and index funds, which perform on average as well as the actively managed
funds.
• Several studies have shown that expenses are the best indicator of a fund’s
performance, with lower expenses being better.
Investments Intuition
Morningstar’s star ratings are quantitative mea-
sures of historical performance that are calcu-
lated once a month. Although they represent
a sound, well-regarded tool for investors if used
properly, a fund’s future performance may be
different from its past performance. Morningstar
urges investors to use its star system of rankings
as a starting point in selecting funds, not as the
bottom line. This is good advice to heed.
Questions 87
• Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) bundle together a basket of assets that trade as
one security on an exchange. They resemble closed-end funds but generally
sell close to NAV and have certain tax advantages.
• Open-end investment companies, commonly called mutual funds, can be
divided into four categories: money market, stock, bond, and hybrid funds.
• Money market mutual funds concentrate their portfolios on money market
securities, providing investors a way to own these high face value securities
indirectly.
• Stock, bond, and hybrid funds own portfolios of stocks and/or bonds, allow-
ing investors to participate in these markets without having to purchase these
securities directly.
• Investors transacting in closed-end funds encounter discounts and premiums,
meaning that the price of these funds is unequal to their net asset values.
• Mutual funds can be load or no-load funds, where the load is a sales charge
calculated as a percentage of the amount invested in the fund.
• Investment companies charge a fee (called the annual expense ratio or simply
“expense ratio”) to shareholders to pay for operating costs and management fee.
• Total return for a mutual fund includes reinvested dividends and capital gains.
A cumulative total return measures the actual performance over a stated
period of time. The average annual return is a hypothetical return that, if
achieved annually, would produce the same cumulative total return as if per-
formance was constant over the entire period.
• International funds invest primarily in international stocks, while global funds
keep a minimum of 25 percent of their assets in the United States.
• Single-country funds, which traditionally have been closed-end funds, concen-
trate on the securities of a single country.
• Fund supermarkets are a mechanism by which investors can buy, own, and
sell the funds of various mutual fund families through one source, such as a
brokerage firm.
• Hedge funds are unregulated companies that seek to exploit various market
opportunities and thereby earn larger returns than are ordinarily available.
Questions
3.1 What is meant by “indirect” investing?
3.2 What is an investment company? Distinguish bet-
ween an open-end and a closed-end company.
3.3 What does the term “open end” mean with regard to
an investment company’s capitalization? What about
the term “closed end?”
3.4 List some reasons an investor might prefer an ETF to
an open-end fund.
3.5 It has been said that many closed-end funds are
“worth more dead than alive.” What is meant by this
expression?
3.6 How similar is an ETF to a closed-end fund?
3.7 What does it mean for an investment company to be
regulated?
3.8 What is meant by an investment company’s “objec-
tive?” What are some of the objectives pursued by
equity, bond, and income funds?
3.9 How is the net asset value for a mutual fund calcu-
lated?
3.10 What is a money market fund? Why would it appeal
to investors?
3.11 List the benefits of a money market fund for investors.
List the disadvantages. What alternative investment is
a close substitute?
3.12 Distinguish between a value fund and a growth fund.
3.13 Distinguish between a global fund and an interna-
tional fund.
3.14 What is the difference between the average annual
return for a fund and the geometric mean return for
that fund?
3.15 What is the value to investors of Morningstar ratings?
What is the weakness of these ratings?
3.16 Distinguish between the direct and indirect methods
by which mutual fund shares are typically purchased.