443CH APTER 17
Most financial advisors recommend
that investors allocate a significant
portion of their investment port-
folio to bonds. Bonds are viewed
as attractive components of a well-
diversified portfolio due to their
relatively predictable cash flow
stream and their ability to preserve
capital. You may be sold on the idea
of including bonds in your portfo-
lio; however, before purchasing any
security, it is important to under-
stand the advantages and disad-
vantages of the security. You know
that risk and return are the funda-
mental characteristics that investors
are concerned about, but how do
the features of bonds impact these
characteristics? Specifically, how do
bond features such as the coupon rate, time to maturity, and callability affect the
return and risk of a bond? If you want to be a successful investor, it is imperative that
you answer these questions before diving into a bond investment.
This chapter provides an analysis of bond yields and prices. Bond market partici-
pants use various yield measures unique to bonds when quoting potential returns to
investors. However, these measures can mislead unwary investors who fail to under-
stand the basis on which they are constructed. It is important to understand how
bonds are valued, how bond features impact bond prices and returns, and how
bond prices change over time. This chapter covers the mechanics of bond calcula-
tions, an important part of an investor’s toolkit.
Introduction
In order to establish a balanced portfolio, you have decided to invest a portion
of your $1 million in fixed-income securities—specifically bonds. How should the
following variables influence your decision as to the fixed-income securities to
hold: maturity, type of bond, credit worthiness, inflation, yield, and future inter-
est rates?
Bond Yields and Prices
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Calculate and interpret various
bond yield measures, most impor-
tantly, the yield to maturity.
• Calculate the price of a bond.
• Determine how bond prices
change as the interest rate
changes.
• Explain how the most prominent
bond features affect the risk and
return of a bond.
• Describe the term structure of
interest rates and the yield curve.
Bond Yields and Interest Rates
For our purposes, bond yields and interest rates are interchangeable concepts.
Therefore, we begin our discussion with a consideration of interest rates.
Interest rates measure the rental rate paid by a borrower to a lender for the use
of funds over some time period—that is, interest rates are the rental rate for loan-
able funds. The rental rate differs from case to case, based on demand and supply
for the funds. The spread between the lowest and highest rates at any point in time
could be as much as 10–15 percentage points. In bond parlance, this is equiva-
lent to 1,000–1,500 basis points, since 1 percentage point in yield equates to 100
basis points. During the financial crisis of 2008, the spread between speculative
bonds and Treasury bonds widened dramatically, exceeding 20 percentage points.
• 100 basis points = 1 percentage point
It is convenient to focus on the one interest rate that provides the foundation for
other rates. This rate is referred to as the risk-free rate (designated RF in this text)
and is typically proxied by the rate on Treasury securities. All other rates differ from
RF because of risk factors.
The Basic Components of Interest Rates
Fully understanding interest rates is a complex task that involves learning about
numerous advanced economic relationships. Such a task is not feasible in this text.1
However, we can analyze the basic determinants of nominal (observed) interest
rates with an eye toward recognizing the factors that affect such rates and cause
them to fluctuate. The bond investor who understands the foundations of market
rates is better positioned to interpret and evaluate bond market information.
The basic foundation of interest rates is the opportunity cost of foregoing con-
sumption, representing the rate that must be offered to persuade individuals to save
rather than consume. This rate is sometimes called the real risk-free rate because it
is not affected by price changes or risk factors. We refer to it simply as the real rate
and designate it rr in this discussion.
• Nominal (observed) interest rates on Treasury securities consist of the real
rate plus an adjustment for expected inflation.
A lender who lends $100 for a year at 10 percent will be repaid $110. But if
inflation is 4 percent a year, the $110 that the lender receives is worth, in terms of
purchasing power, only (1/1.04)($110), or $105.60. Lenders therefore expect to be
compensated for the expected inflation rate in order to leave their real purchasing
power unchanged. This inflation adjustment can be combined with the real risk-
free rate. Unlike rr, which is often assumed by market participants to be reasonably
stable with time, adjustments for expected inflation vary widely over time.
Basis Points 100 basis
points is equal to 1 per-
centage point
Real Risk-Free Rate The
opportunity cost of forego-
ing consumption, given
no inflation
Assume the 10-year Treasury bond yield to maturity
(YTM) is 4.54 percent, compared to 4.39 percent a week
earlier. The yield has increased 15 basis points in a week, or 0.15 percent.
EXAMPLE 17.1
1 Most texts on financial markets contain a good, concise discussion of interest rates.
Bond Yields and Interest Rates 445
Thus, the nominal interest rate is a function of the real rate and the expected infla-
tion premium. This is expressed as Equation 17-12
:
1 1 1
1 1 1
RF rr ei
RF rr ei
( ) ( )
( ) ( ) (17-1)
where
RF
rr
Return on Treasury securities
the real risk-free rate
eei the expected rate of inflation over the term of the insstrument
Equation 17-1 (the Fisher equation) indicates that the nominal rate rises with
increases in expected inflation and the real risk-free rate.3 Turning Equation 17-1
around, estimates of the real rate can be easily derived. Most market participants
typically estimate the real rate to be in the 1–2 percent range.
One source of expected inflation data is the Survey of Consumers by the Univer-
sity of Michigan. Participants are asked to predict how much prices will change over
a horizon of 1 year and 5–10 years. The median expected price change for the next
12 months can be seen in graphical form at the St. Louis Fed website.4 The Fed web-
site also presents a graph of the five-year inflation forecast, which is derived using the
Fisher equation along with 5-year Treasury Inflation Protected Security (TIPS) yields.
Building on Equation 17-1, we can formulate a statement for all interest rates,
R, as
R RF rp (17-2)
In this formulation, rp incorporates all risk premiums resulting from bond fea-
tures such as time to maturity, credit quality, liquidity, callability, and sinking fund
provisions. In the discussion that follows, we separate the time element from the
issuer characteristics.
Investments Intuition
When Interest Rates are Constrained
We think of most interest rates as being freely
determined in the marketplace. However, we
know that in the years following the 2008 finan-
cial crisis, market conditions were “abnormal”
with record unemployment, sluggish growth, an
economic crisis that almost crippled the country,
and a European sovereign debt crisis. Under
such conditions, we should expect the Federal
Reserve to take drastic actions to try to bolster
the economy, resulting in unusual interest rates.
Starting in December 2008, the Fed’s target for
short-term interest rates was anchored between
0.0 percent and 0.25 percent, and this condition
continued on into 2015. This action led to
“strange” interest rates. For example, in early
2015, the yield on short-term Treasury bills was
essentially zero.
446 Chapter 17 Bond Yields and Prices
The Term Structure of Interest Rates
The term structure of interest rates refers to the relationship between time to matu-
rity and yield to maturity (YTM). Ideally, other factors are held constant, particularly
the risk of default. The easiest way to do this is to examine U.S. Treasury securities,
which have no practical risk of default.
Yield curves The term structure is usually plotted in the form of a yield curve.
The horizontal axis represents time to maturity, whereas the vertical axis represents
YTM. An example yield curve, based on U.S. Treasury bond yields as of March 2015,
is plotted in Figure 17.1. 5 The average yield curve is generally upward sloping but is
not as steep as the curve depicted in Figure 17.1.
• The yield curve is a graphical depiction of the relationship between YTM and
time to maturity for bonds of the same issuer, such as the U.S. Treasury.
Most observations about yield curves involve general statements regarding inves-
tor expectations about future interest rates.
Term Structure of Interest
Rates The relationship
between time to maturity
and bond yields
Yield Curve A graphical
depiction of the relation-
ship between bond YTM
and time to maturity
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1 mo 3 mo 6 mo 1 yr 2 yr 3 yr 5 yr 7 yr 10 yr 15 yr 20 yr 25 yr 30 yr
YTM (%)
Bond time to maturity
FIGURE 17.1 Yield curve as of March 2015 (based on treasury bond yields)
Source: Data for the graph was obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Link: http://research.stlouisfed.
org/fred2.
Some Practical Advice
Pay Attention to the Yield Curve
Under normal conditions, long-term Trea-
sury rates are about 1–2 percentage points
above Treasury bill rates. This spread frequently
widens as the economy comes out of a reces-
sion, resulting in a steeper upward-sloping
yield curve. Yield curves often become flat
or humped as economic activity slows and
interest rates drop. When the yield curve
becomes inverted (sloping downward), many
analysts argue that a recession is inevitable in
the near future.
Bond Yields and Interest Rates 447
Term structure theories A theory of the term structure of interest rates is needed
to explain the shape and slope of the yield curve and why it shifts over time. The-
ories traditionally advanced are the expectations theory, the liquidity preference
theory, the preferred habitat theory, and the market segmentation theory.
The “pure or unbiased” expectations theory of the term structure asserts the
return from holding an n-period security equals the average return expected from
holding a series of short-term securities over the same n periods. In other words,
the long-term interest rate is equal to an average of the present yield and expected
future yields on short-term securities that are expected to prevail over the long-term
period. Therefore, for a period of given length, the total return is expected to be
the same whether an investor follows a strategy of investing in a series of short-term
securities or invests in a long-term security.
In effect, the term structure consists of a set of forward rates and a current known
rate. Forward rates are rates that are expected to prevail in the future; that is, they
are unobservable but anticipated future rates.
• Under the expectations theory, long rates are an average of the present and
future short-term rates.
For example, the rate on a three-year bond is an average of the current
one-year rate and the expected forward rates for the next two years. The same
principle holds for any number of periods; therefore, the market rate for any
maturity can be expressed as an average of the current rate and the applicable
forward rates. Technically, the average involved is a geometric rather than an
arithmetic average.
For example, the rate for a three-year bond equals a geometric average of the
current one-year rate t R1 and the expected forward rates for the subsequent two
years.
Therefore, in equation form
1 1 1 13 1 1 1 2 1
1 3
t t t tR R r r /
(17-3)
where
t
t
R
R
3
1
the current known rate on a three-year bond
the currrent known rate on a one-year bond
the expected ratet r1 1 on a bond with one year to maturity beginning one year frrom now
the expected rate on a bond with one year tot r2 1 maturity beginning two years from now
The same principle applies for any number of periods. Any long-term rate is a
geometric average of consecutive one-period rates.
Expectations Theory
States that the long-term
interest rate is equal to
an average of short-term
rates that are expected to
prevail over the long-term
period
Forward Rates Unobserv-
able rates expected to
prevail in the future
Assume that the current one-year bond rate t R1 is 7
percent and the two forward rates are 7.5 percent t r1 1
and 8.2 percent t r2 1 . The rate for a three-year bond tR3
, would be
t R3
1 3
1 07 1 075 1 082 1 0
1 0757 1 0
0 0757 7
. . . .
. .
.
/
or .. %57
EXAMPLE 17.2
448 Chapter 17 Bond Yields and Prices
Forward rates cannot be easily measured, but they can be inferred for any one-
year future period. The expectations theory, however, does not say that these future
expected rates will be correct; it simply says that there is a relationship between rates
today and rates expected in the future.
Under this hypothesis, an investors’ expected return over any holding period
is independent of their choice of investment strategy. Any combination of secu-
rity maturities that satisfy a particular holding period will have the same expected
return.
The assumption underlying the expectations theory is that expected future
rates are equal to computed forward rates. Profit-seeking individuals will exploit
any differences between forward rates and expected rates, ensuring that the rates
equilibrate.
The liquidity preference theory states that interest rates reflect current and
expected short rates, as in the expectations theory, but the theory adds a liquidity
risk premium. Because uncertainty increases with time, investors generally prefer
to lend for the short run. Borrowers, however, generally prefer to borrow for the
long run in order to be assured of funds. Investors receive a liquidity premium to
induce them to lend long-term, while paying a price (in the form of lower yields)
for investing short-term. The implication of this theory is that longer-term bonds
should offer higher yields.
The difference between the liquidity preference theory and the expectations
theory is the recognition that interest rate expectations are uncertain. Risk-averse
investors seek to be compensated for this uncertainty. Forward rates and estimated
future rates are not the same; they differ by the amount of the liquidity premium.
The preferred habitat theory contends that market participants have maturity seg-
ments where they prefer to operate. In order to induce a lender/borrower to move
out of their preferred maturity sector, the lender/borrower needs to be offered an
incentive, in the form of a more attractive interest rate. The market segmentation
theory is a more extreme version of the preferred habitat theory and contends that
market participants will not leave their desired maturity segment. For example, life
insurance companies are generally assumed to prefer long-term investments due to
the long-term nature of their liabilities. In contrast, nonfinancial firms with tempo-
rary fund excesses generally prefer to invest the extra funds in short-term securities.
According to the preferred habitat and market segmentation theories, the inter-
est rate in a particular maturity segment is determined by supply and demand
conditions within that segment. For example, if there is excess demand relative to
supply in the long-term maturity segment, interest rates will be driven up in this
segment. Further, if the short- and intermediate-term maturity segments have more
balance between demand and supply, the interest rates in these maturity segments
will be moderated relative to the long-term segment. Thus, under these conditions,
the yield curve will be upward sloping due to the upward pressure on rates on the
far end of the curve.
Forward rates have the most relevance within the expectations theory and
the least relevance in the preferred habitat/market segmentation theory. In the
Liquidity Preference
Theory States that long-
term interest rates reflect
current and expected
short rates, as in the
expectations theory, but
they also include a liquid-
ity risk premium
According to the expectations theory, a five-year bond will
have the same expected return as a two-year bond held to
maturity plus a three-year bond bought at the beginning of the third year.
Bond Yields and Interest Rates 449
expectations theory, forward rates equal expected future spot rates, and thus, long-
term rates represent averages of expected short-term rates. In the preferred habitat
and market segmentation theory, the relation between long-term and short-term
rates is not defined.
There is empirical evidence that supports each of the yield curve theories, so it is
imperative that you understand the basics of each. It is likely that each theory plays
a role in describing the relationship between time to maturity and yield; however,
the prominence of that role may change over time.
Risk Premiums (Yield Spreads)
Risk premiums, or yield spreads, refer to differences in security yields that are attributed to
the securities’ characteristics. They are a result of the following factors:
1. Differences in quality, or risk of default. Clearly, a bond rated Baa will offer a
higher yield than a comparable bond rated Aaa because of its greater default
risk.
2. Differences in time to maturity. The longer the time period involved, the
greater the uncertainty.
3. Differences in call features. A bond that is callable will have a higher YTM
than an otherwise identical noncallable bond. If the bond is called, bond-
holders must give it up, and they can replace it only with a bond carrying a
lower YTM. Therefore, investors expect to be compensated for this risk.
4. Differences in coupon rates. Bonds with low coupons pay a larger part of their
YTM in the form of capital gains.
5. Differences in marketability. Some bonds are more marketable than others,
meaning that their liquidity is better. They can be sold more quickly or with
less of a price concession, or both. The less marketable a bond, the higher
the YTM.
6. Differences in tax treatments.
7. Differences between countries.
• Yield spreads are a function of the features attached to a particular bond issue
or issuer.
Other factors affecting yield spreads Investors expect to be compensated for
risk, and this compensation is reflected in the risk premium. However, the actions of
borrowers also affect the yield spread. Heavy Treasury financing, for example, may
cause the yield spreads between governments and corporates to narrow as the large
increase in the supply of Treasury securities pushes up the yields on Treasuries.
Yield Spreads Differences
in yields due to differ-
ences in bond features
such as quality, callability,
and taxes
Investments Intuition
The term spread is often defined as the
difference between the YTM on a 10-year T-bond
and the YTM on a T-bill. The spread can be
interpreted as a risk premium. In this case, the
risk premium is compensation for committing
wealth to long-term investments in the face of
unanticipated inflation shocks. The term spread
is positive when the yield curve is upward
sloping and negative when the yield curve
is inverted
The level of interest rates also plays a role in explaining yield spreads. As a gen-
eral proposition, risk premiums tend to be high when the level of interest rates is
high.
Yield spreads over time The size of the yield spread changes over time based on
changes in perceived risk. Whenever the differences in yield become smaller, the
yield spread is said to “narrow”; as the differences increase, it “widens.”
The credit spread, also called the default premium, is one of the most popular
yield spreads. The credit spread reflects the difference in yields between a lower-
quality bond and a higher-quality bond of comparable maturity. For example, the
credit spread is often derived as the YTM of a long-term Baa-rated bond index minus
the YTM of a long-term T-bond index.
The credit spread commonly widens during periods of economic uncertainty,
when investors become more risk-averse, and it narrows during times of economic
prosperity. Since the probability of default is greater during a recession, investors
demand more of a premium. The credit spread widened substantially in 2008 dur-
ing the financial crisis. In contrast, the spread narrowed gradually as the economy
recovered in subsequent years. The spread in 2018 was especially low because even
financially weak companies have a good chance of surviving and paying their debt
obligations when economic growth is strong.
Figure 17.2 shows the spread between 10-year Treasuries and Baa corporate
bonds, a measure of the credit spread. In 2006 and 2007, the spread was relatively
narrow averaging less than 2 percent, which reflected investor confidence in the
economy. However, as a result of the recession and financial crises, the spread wid-
ened substantially, reaching 6 percent by the end of 2008. The spread narrowed
considerably during 2009; however, notice that in the post-crisis period, the spread
remained above its pre-crisis level, reflecting lingering doubts about economic con-
ditions. The spread did not return to its normal level until late in 2017, nearly 10
years after the financial crisis began.
• The credit spread generally varies inversely with business activity.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
YTM (%) Baa corp bond
Yield Spread—Baa Corp Bond and 10-Year T-bond
10-year Treasury
FIGURE 17.2 Yield spread between Baa corporate bond and 10-year T-bond (credit spread), 2006–2018
Source: Data for the graph was obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Link: http://research.stlouisfed.
org/fred2.
Measuring Bond Yields 451
Measuring Bond Yields
Several measures of the yield on a bond are used by investors. It is very important for
investors to understand which yield measure is being discussed and the measure’s
underlying assumptions. We consider five different measures of a bond’s return, as
shown in Figure 17.3.
To illustrate current yield and YTM, we use an Aaa-rated corporate bond with the
following features:
Current price = $1,052.10
Maturity = three years
Coupon = 10 percent, or $100 per year, with semiannual interest payments of $50
occurring every six months
Note that this is a premium bond because its price is greater than its par value of
$1,000. For a discount bond, the price is less than par value.
• Interest payments on bonds (i.e., the coupons) are typically paid semiannu-
ally—this is the actual payment mechanism that has existed for many years.
Unless otherwise noted, assume that coupons are paid semiannually.
In practice, bond market participants frequently reference bond prices in per-
cent of par value. For example, a discount bond quoted at 89.52 is selling at $895.20,
whereas a premium bond quoted at 104.35 is selling at $1,043.50.
Current Yield
The ratio of the annual coupon to the current price is the current yield, which as
a measure of return is superior to simply citing a bond’s coupon rate because it
uses the current price as opposed to the bond’s face value (almost always, $1,000).
However, current yield is not a true measure of a bond’s return because it does
not account for the difference between the bond’s purchase price and its eventual
redemption at par value.
Premium Bond A bond
whose price is above the
$1,000 face value
Discount Bond A bond
whose price is below the
face value of $1,000
Current Yield A bond’s
annual coupon divided by
its current price
Current yield
Yield to
maturity
Yield to first
call
Realized
compound
yield
Horizon yield
FIGURE 17.3 Some measures of a bond’s yield or return
452 Chapter 17 Bond Yields and Prices
Yield to Maturity
Assume you are interested in buying some bonds for your portfolio. After a diligent
search, your advisor finds a 15-year, high-quality bond with a YTM of 6.25 percent.
Your advisor recommends the bond stating, “it guarantees you a return of 6.25 per-
cent if it is held to maturity.” Is your advisor’s statement accurate?
• The bond return most often quoted is the yield to maturity (YTM), a promised
rate of return that occurs only under specific assumptions.
YTM is the return an investor will receive from a bond purchased at the current
market price if
1. The bond is held to maturity.
2. The coupons received are reinvested at the calculated YTM.
In practice, YTM is the average annual return on the bond over its life. 6 However,
an investor will actually earn this promised rate if and only if the two stated condi-
tions are met. As we shall see, the likelihood of the second condition actually being
met is extremely small. Thus, in our example, your chances of earning exactly 6.25
percent over the bond’s 15-year life are almost zero.
The YTM is derived from Equation 17-4 where the market price, the coupon,
the number of years to maturity, and the face value of the bond are known. The
discount rate or YTM is the variable to be determined. Note in the following discussion
that lowercase letters ytm, c, and n are used to denote semiannual variables, whereas capital
letters YTM, C, and N are used to denote annual variables.
• Bond calculations in the United States usually involve semiannual periods,
because bond interest is typically paid twice a year:
P c
t
n
t
t n
1 1 1ytm ytm
FV (17-4)
where
P
n
the current market price of the bond
the number of semiaannual periods to maturity
ytm the semiannual yield to matuurity to be solved for
the semiannual coupon in dollars
F
c
VV the face value maturity value or par value which in t( ), hhis discussion is $1 000,
Since both the left-hand side of Equation 17-4 and the numerator values (cash
flows) on the right-hand side are known, the equation can be solved for ytm. Because
of the semiannual nature of interest payments, the annual coupon on the bond, C,
is divided in half (to obtain c) and the number of periods, N, is doubled (to obtain
 The discount rate (ytm), equates the inflows from the bond (coupons plus matu-
rity value) with its current price (cost).
$ $
ytm
$
ytm
$ $ p
1 052 10 50
1
1 000
1
1 052 10 50
1
6
6
, . ( )
,
( )
, . (
t
t
rresent value of an annuity for six periods
$ p
, % )
, (
4
1 000 rresent value factor for six periods
$ $
, % )
, . ( .
4
1 052 10 50 5 2422 1 000 0 790
1 052 10 1 052 10
4
2 4
) , ( . )
, . , .
%
%
$
$ $
semiannual ytm
88% ( )annual YTM bond equivalent yield
In Example 17.5, the solution is 4 percent on a semiannual basis, which we
call ytm and which by convention is doubled to obtain the annual YTM of 8 per-
cent. A YTM calculated by annualizing in this manner is referred to as the bond
equivalent yield.
An investor who purchases a bond and holds it to maturity will earn the promised
YTM if and only if the cash flows are reinvested at the calculated YTM. Thus, the
rate(s) at which the cash flows are reinvested over the life of the bond will affect the
actual outcome of every coupon-paying bond investment.
YTM for a zero-coupon bond Recall from Chapter 2 that a zero-coupon
bond has no cash flows (coupons); instead, it is bought at a discount and held to
Bond Equivalent
Yield Yield on an annual
basis, derived by doubling
the semiannual yield
Consider a 10 percent coupon bond with three years to
maturity. The annual coupon is $100, which is paid $50
every six months, and the total number of semiannual periods is six. Assume
the bond sells at a premium with a price of $1,052.10. Due to the inverse
relation between bond prices and market yields, it is clear that yields have
declined since the bond was originally issued, because the price is greater than
$1,000. Using Equation 17-4, we can illustrate conceptually what is happening
when we solve for ytm, although to actually solve for ytm we would use a
calculator or computer.
EXAMPLE 17.5
Using a financial calculator,
N I/YR PV PMT FV
6 ? −1,052.10 50 1,000
Note that the price of the bond is entered as a negative using the +/− key. The
values entered for N and PMT are semiannual values. The face or par value is
almost always $1,000. Computing I/YR, we find the semiannual yield (ytm),
to be 4 percent. We double this to obtain the bond equivalent yield (YTM) of
maturity. The YTM calculation for a zero-coupon bond is based on the same process
expressed in Equation 17-4—equating the current price to the future cash flows
to find ytm and then doubling this result to obtain the annual YTM. Because there
are no coupons, the only cash flow is the face value of the bond to be received at
maturity. We assume a $1,000 face value for all bonds discussed. The ytm calcula-
tion for a zero-coupon bond reduces to Equation 17-5, with all terms as previously
defined:
ytm FV/P n1
1
/
(17-5)
Multiply by 2 to obtain YTM, the bond equivalent yield.
Yield to First Call
Many corporate bonds, as well as some government bonds, are callable by the
issuer, typically after some deferred call period. For bonds likely to be called,
the yield-to-maturity calculation is unrealistic. A better calculation is the yield
to first call. The end of the deferred call period, when a bond can first be
called, is often used for the yield-to-first-call calculation. This is particularly
appropriate for bonds selling at a premium (i.e., high-coupon bonds with prices
above par value). 7
• Premium bonds are vulnerable to call. Investors in premium bonds pay care-
ful attention to a bond’s yield to first call, particularly if they expect a further
drop in interest rates.
To calculate yield to first call, the ytm formula (Equation 17-4) is used, but with
the number of periods until the first call date substituted for the number of periods
until maturity and the call price substituted for face value. Issuers often pay a call
premium to call a bond, and therefore, the call price generally differs from the
maturity value of $1,000. These changes are shown in Equation 17-6:
P c
t
t
t
1 1 1
fc
yc
CP
yc fc (17-6)
Yield to First Call The
promised return from the
present to the date that
the bond is likely to be
called
A zero-coupon bond has 12 years to maturity and is selling
for $300. Given the 24 semiannual periods, the power
used in raising the ratio of $1,000/$300, or 3.3333, is 0.04167 (calculated as
1/24). Using a calculator produces a value of 1.05145. Subtracting the 1.0 and
multiplying by 100 leaves a ytm, of 5.145 percent. The YTM is 10.29 percent.
Using a financial calculator,
N I/YR PV PMT FV
24 ? −300 0 1,000
Computing I/YR, we find the ytm, to be 5.145 percent, and YTM is 10.29 percent
where
fc the number of semiannual periods until the first call daate
yc the yield to first call on a semiannual basis
CP the call price to be paid by the issuer if the bond is calledd
Bonds are priced on the basis of the lowest yield measure. Therefore, for pre-
mium bonds selling above a certain level, yield to first call replaces YTM, because it
produces the lowest measure of yield.
Realized Compound Yield
After the investment period for a bond is over, an investor can calculate the
realized compound yield (RCY). This rate measures the yield the bond invest-
ment earned over the investment period, taking into account all intermediate
cash flows and reinvestment rates. It cannot be determined until the investment
is concluded and all cash flows are known. Thus, if you invest $1,000 in a bond
for five years, reinvesting the coupons as they are received, you will have X dol-
lars at the conclusion of the five years, consisting of the coupons received, the
amount earned from reinvesting the coupons, and the $1,000 par value of the
bond payable at maturity. You can then calculate your actual realized return on
the investment.
• The RCY is calculated by dividing the total dollar return at the bond’s
maturity by the amount invested and raising the result to the 1/n power,
where n is the number of (semiannual) compounding periods. Next, sub-
tract 1.0 from the result. Finally, multiply by 2 to obtain the bond equiva-
lent rate.
The realized compound yield is calculated using the following formula:
RCY total dollar return
purchase price of bond
1
1 0
/
.
n
(17-7)
Total dollar return for a coupon bond held to maturity is the sum of the matu-
rity value ($1,000), the coupons, and the interest earned by reinvesting the
coupons.
Realized Compound Yield
(RCY) Yield earned based
on actual reinvestment
rates during the life of the
bond
Assume a 15-year, 6 percent bond is callable in 5 years at a
price of $1,050. The bond currently sells for $1,075. The
semiannual yield to call is calculated as
N I/YR PV PMT FV
10 ? −1,075 30 1,050
I/YR, the semiannual yield to call, is 2.584 percent. The bond equivalent yield (yield to
call) is 5.17 percent. The YTM on this bond is 5.27 percent.
456 Chapter 17 Bond Yields and Prices
The above example illustrates the assumptions underlying the YTM. The YTM
assumes that all coupons are reinvested at a rate equal to the bond’s YTM. If all
coupons are reinvested at the calculated YTM, the realized compound yield will
equal the investor's promised return at the time of purchase, the YTM. This is the
case for the bond in Example 17.8. The promised YTM was 10 percent annually
(bond equivalent basis), and the realized compound yield was 10 percent annually
(bond equivalent basis).
If the coupons are reinvested at different rates, however, the RCY will not equal
the YTM. Assume in Example 17.8 that conditions changed immediately after the
investor purchased the bond so that the coupons were reinvested at 9 percent.
In this case, the value of the coupons and the interest earned on the coupons is
$335.84.
N I/YR PV PMT FV
6 4.5 0 50 ?
The total dollar return is $1,335.84. While the YTM was 10 percent when the
investor purchased the bond, the RCY is now 9.89 percent.
• For the typical bond investment, the YTM will seldom equal the RCY.
This is true because subsequent reinvestment rates will seldom equal the calcu-
lated YTM on the bond. Instead, they will vary over time, being higher than the
calculated YTM at times and lower than the YTM at other times.
Remember,
• YTM is a promised rate and is dependent on the coupons being reinvested at
the YTM.
• RCY is the return realized at the conclusion of the investment and reflects
what was earned based on the reinvestment rates available.
Assume an investor purchased a $1,000, 10 percent
coupon bond with a three-year maturity at face value.
The promised YTM for this bond was 10 percent.
Assume the investor reinvested each coupon at a ytm of 5 percent. At the
end of three years, the investor has a total ending wealth of $1,340.10 which
includes the initial investment of $1,000 (in other words, the investor earned
$340.10 of total interest).
This $340.10 is a combination of the coupons and the interest earned on
the coupons. Using the calculator,
N I/YR PV PMT FV
6 5 0 50 ?
Solving for FV produces $340.10 which added to the maturity value of the
bond gives us a total dollar return of $1,340.10.
The realized compound yield is 5 percent on a semiannual basis or 10
percent on a bond equivalent basis, calculated as
$ /$ semiannually or on a bo1 340 10 1 000 1 0 5 10
1 6
, . , . % , %
/
nnd equivalent basis.
Checking Your Understanding 457
Checking Your Understanding
1. Agree or disagree with the following statement, and explain your reasoning.
“Investors are routinely quoted the YTM on a bond, but the chance of them actu-
ally earning this quoted yield at the termination of the investment is almost zero.”
2. Explain why, for a bond selling at a discount, the coupon rate is less than the
current yield, which is less than the YTM.
Reinvestment risk As noted, the YTM calculation assumes that the investor rein-
vests all coupons at the YTM. Interest on interest is the income earned on the rein-
vestment of the semiannual coupon (interest) payments.
If an investor reinvests the coupons at a rate that differs from the assumed rein-
vestment rate, the realized compound yield will differ from the YTM. And, in fact,
coupons almost always are reinvested at rates higher or lower than the computed
YTM, which gives rise to an important bond risk.
• Reinvestment rate risk is the risk that future reinvestment rates will be less
than the YTM at the time the bond is purchased.
A bond’s total dollar return consists of three components: (1) the coupons paid
on the bond, (2) interest income from the reinvestment of coupons, and (3) the
maturity value of the bond, which is assumed to be $1,000.
The interest-on-interest concept significantly affects the potential total dollar
return. The exact impact is a function of coupon and time to maturity, with rein-
vestment becoming more important as either coupon or time to maturity, or both,
increase. Specifically, holding everything else constant,
1. The longer a bond’s maturity, the greater the reinvestment risk
2. The higher the coupon rate, the greater the dependence of a bond’s total
dollar return on the reinvestment of the coupon payments
Table 17.1 illustrates the impact of interest on interest for a 20-year, 10-percent
bond purchased at par value. Assuming all coupons are reinvested at 5 percent on
a semiannual basis, which is the bond’s ytm, the total dollar return on the bond is
$7,040 ($6,040 attributable to coupons and $1,000 return of principal). More pre-
cisely, there are three separate components as follows:
$1,000 received at maturity
+$2,000 in coupons received over the life of the bond
+$4,040 interest on interest (reinvesting coupons at 5 percent semiannually)
Interest on Interest The
process by which bond
coupons are reinvested to
earn interest
Reinvestment Rate
Risk That part of inter-
est rate risk resulting
from uncertainty about
the rate at which future
interest payments can be
reinvested
Investments Intuition
Consider what happens when investors purchase
bonds at high YTMs, such as the record levels
reached in the summer of 1982. Some utilities
issued bonds with an 18 percent coupon. Inves-
tors expecting to earn 18 percent were ultimately
disappointed when they failed to achieve a real-
ized compound yield equal to the YTM. For the
YTM to become a realized yield, coupons have to
be reinvested at the record rates existing at the
purchase date, an unlikely situation for a high-
YTM bond with a long maturity. The subsequent
decline in interest rates during the fall of 1982
illustrates the fallacy of believing that one has
“locked up” record yields during a brief period of
very high interest rates. Investors in this situation
are sometimes said to be subject to yield illusion
Bond Yields and Prices
Table 17.1 illustrates the importance of the reinvestment rate in determining
realized yields. If the reinvestment rate equals the YTM of 10 percent, the investor
earns a 10 percent RCY when the bond is held to maturity, with $4,040 of the total
dollar return attributable to interest on interest.
Notice in this case that interest on interest is the largest single component of the
total dollar return. If coupons are reinvested at rates above YTM, the RCY rises, and
an even larger percentage of the total dollar return comes from interest on interest.
Clearly, the reinvestment portion of a bond’s total dollar return is critical in deter-
mining the actual return earned.
• For long-term bonds, the interest-on-interest component is typically the most
important component of total dollar return.
One advantage of a zero-coupon bond is the elimination of reinvestment
rate risk because there are no coupons to be reinvested. At the time of purchase,
To calculate the RCY with a 12 percent reinvestment rate,
add the total return from coupons shown in Table 17.1,
$7,738, to the maturity value of the bond, $1,000, to obtain the total dollar
return of $8,738. Then divide by the purchase price and raise to the appropriate
power (take the 40th root). Therefore,
RCY $ /
or on a
[ , , ] .
. .
. , . %
/
8 738 1 000 1 0
1 0557 1 0
0 0557 5 57
1 40
semiannual basis
The annual RCY is 5.57 percent × 2 = 11.14 percent.
Almost 75 percent of the total return comes from interest on interest
($5,738/$7,738).
EXAMPLE 17.9
Realized Compound Yields (RCYs) Using Different Reinvestment Rate Assumptions
for a 10-Percent, 20-Year Bond Purchased at Face Value
(1) Coupon
Incomea ($)
(2) Assumed
Reinvestment
Rate (%)
(3) Total
Return from
Couponsb ($)
(4) Amount
Attributable to
Reinvestmentc ($)
(5) Realized
Compound
Yieldd (%)
2,000 0 2,000 0 5.57
2,000 5 3,370 1,370 7.51
2,000 8 4,751 2,751 8.94
2,000 9 5,352 3,352 9.46
2,000 10 6,040 4,040 10.00
2,000 11 6,830 4,830 10.56
2,000 12 7,738 5,738 11.14
a Coupon income = total coupons received over 20 years (40 semiannual periods) = $50 coupon semiannually × 40 periods.
b Total return from coupons = all coupons received plus all income earned from reinvesting the coupons over the bond’s life. Using a calculator: N = 40; I/YR =
1/2 of assumed reinvestment rate; PV = 0; PMT = 50; solve for FV.
Example: at an 8-percent reinvestment rate, N = 40; I/YR = 4; PV = 0; PMT = 50; FV = $4,751.
c Amount attributable to reinvestment of coupons = total return from coupons minus coupon income ($2,000). This is also known as the interest on interest.
d Realized compound yield = [total dollar return/cost of the bond]1/n−1, where total dollar return = total return from coupons + the maturity value of $1,00
Bond Prices 459
investors know the RCY that will be earned when the bond is held to maturity—it is
simply the YTM because there are no coupons to reinvest.
• A zero-coupon bond can be used to eliminate reinvestment rate risk.
Horizon return As we have seen, each of the yield measures has problems. Cur-
rent yield is clearly an incomplete measure of a bond’s return. Both YTM and yield
to first call have potential problems because of the reinvestment rate assumptions
made. What can a bond investor do in these circumstances?
Bond investors often make specific assumptions about future reinvestment rates
in order to cope with the reinvestment rate problem. This is sometimes referred to
as horizon analysis. Given their assumptions about the reinvestment rate, investors
can calculate the horizon (total) return over a specified period.
The investor makes an assumption about the reinvestment rate expected to pre-
vail over the planned investment horizon. The investor may also make an assumption
about the YTM expected to prevail at the end of the planned investment horizon,
which in turn is used to estimate the bond’s price at that time. Based on these
assumptions, the future dollars expected to be available at the end of the planned
investment horizon can be determined. The horizon return is then calculated as
the interest rate that equates the total future dollars to the bond’s purchase price.
Checking Your Understanding
3. Assume an investor holds a bond that is guaranteed not to default. Can the
YTM on this bond be described as the actual return the investor will receive,
rather than a promised return?
Bond Prices
The Valuation Principle
A security’s estimated value determines the price that investors place on the security
in the open market. Recall from Chapter 10 that a security’s intrinsic value, or esti-
mated value, is the present value of the security’s expected cash flows. Any security
purchased is expected to provide one or more cash flows sometime in the future.
These cash flows could be periodic, such as interest or dividends, or simply a termi-
nal price or redemption value, or a combination of these. Since the cash flows occur
in the future, they must be discounted at an appropriate rate to determine their pre-
sent value. The sum of the discounted cash flows is the estimated intrinsic value of
the asset. Equation 17-8 expresses this concept, which is a repeat of Equation 10.1:
Value cash flows
0
1 1t
n
t
r( ) (17-8)
where
Value the estimated value of the security now time perio0 ( dd
Cash flows the future cash flows resulting from owner
0)
sship of the asset
the appropriate discount rate or requir rred return for an investment of this type
number of perin oods over which the cash flows are expected
Horizon (Total) Return
Bond return based on
assumptions about rein-
vestment rates
460 Chapter 17 Bond Yields and Prices
Bond Valuation
The price of a bond should equal the present value of its expected cash flows. 8
The coupons and the principal repayment of $1,000 are known, and the value
can be determined by discounting these future payments at an appropriate
required yield, r. Equation 17-9 is used to solve for the price of an option-free
coupon bond:
P c
r rt
n
t
t n
1 1 1
FV (17-9)
where
P
c
the value or price of the bond today time period
th
( )0
ee semiannual coupons or interest payments
FV the face valuee or par value of the bond
the number of semiannual pe
( )
n rriods until the bond matures
the appropriate semiannualr ddiscount rate or market yield
To conform with the semiannual payment practice on bonds, the discount
rate (r), the coupon (c t), and the number of periods (n) are expressed on a
semiannual basis. Equation 17-9 is the equation that underlies standard bond
practices.
The value process for a typical coupon-bearing bond requires three inputs: the
dollar coupon, the face value, and the applicable market yield.
Consider bond A with a three-year maturity, a 10 percent
coupon rate, and a required semiannual yield of 5
percent. The price of bond A, based on Equation 17-9, is
P A t
t
( ) ( . )
,
( . ) . . ,
1
6
6
50
1 0 05
1 000
1 0 05 253 78 746 21 1
$ $ $ $ $ 0000
The bond’s price should be $1,000 since its coupon rate equals its required
yield.
Now consider bond B, with risk identical to bond A, issued five years ago
when its required yield was 7 percent. Assume that the bond’s required yield
is now 10 percent, or 5 percent on a semiannual basis, and that the bond has
three years left to maturity. Investors certainly will not pay $1,000 for bond
B and receive $35 semiannually when they can pay $1,000 for bond A and
receive $50 semiannually. However, they will pay a price determined by the
use of Equation 17-9.
P B t
t
( ) ( . )
,
( . ) . .
1
6
6
35
1 0 05
1 000
1 0 05 177 64 746 22 92
$ $ $ $ $ 33 86
Bond Price Changes 461
• The appropriate discount rate is the bond’s required yield.
The required yield (r), in Equation 17-9, is specific for each bond. It is the current
market rate on comparable bonds with the same maturity and the same credit quality.
(In other words, it is an opportunity cost.) Thus, market interest rates are incorpo-
rated directly into the discount rate used to solve for the fundamental value of a bond.
Since market interest rates fluctuate constantly, required yields do also. When
solving for a bond price, it is customary to use ytm as the discount rate as shown in
Equation 17-4, which is restated as Equation 17-10:
P c
t
n
t
t n
1 1 1ytm
FV
ytm (17-10)
Bond Price Changes
Bond Price Changes Over Time
Assume that we calculate the price of a 20-year bond issued 5 years ago and deter-
mine that it is $910. The bond still has 15 years to maturity. What can we say about
its price over the next 15 years?
With everything else held constant, including market interest rates, bond prices
that differ from the bond’s face value ($1,000) must converge to $1,000 over time.
Why? On a bond’s specified maturity date, it pays its face value or maturity value.
• Over time, holding all other factors constant, a bond’s price must converge
to $1,000 on the maturity date because that is the amount the issuer pays the
bondholder at maturity.
After bonds are issued, they can sell at discounts (prices less than $1,000) and
premiums (prices greater than $1,000) during their lifetimes. Therefore, holding
all other factors constant, a bond selling at a discount will experience a rise in price
over time, and a bond selling at a premium will experience a price decline as the
bond’s remaining life approaches zero.
Figure 17.4 illustrates bond price movements over time assuming constant yields.
Bond 2 illustrates a 10 percent coupon, 30-year bond assuming that its required
yield remains constant at 10 percent. The price of this bond does not change, begin-
ning at $1,000 and ending at $1,000. Bond 1 illustrates an 8 percent coupon, 30-year
bond assuming that its required yield starts, and remains constant, at 10 percent.
Using a financial calculator,
N I/YR PV PMT FV
6 5 ? 35 1,000
Computing the PV, we find the price of the bond is $923.86.
Bond B is valued, as is any other asset, on the basis of its future stream of
benefits (cash flows) using an appropriate market yield. Since the numerator is
always specified for coupon-bearing bonds at time of issuance, the only issue in
valuing a typical bond is to determine the denominator or discount rate
Bond Price Changes 461
• The appropriate discount rate is the bond’s required yield.
The required yield (r), in Equation 17-9, is specific for each bond. It is the current
market rate on comparable bonds with the same maturity and the same credit quality.
(In other words, it is an opportunity cost.) Thus, market interest rates are incorpo-
rated directly into the discount rate used to solve for the fundamental value of a bond.
Since market interest rates fluctuate constantly, required yields do also. When
solving for a bond price, it is customary to use ytm as the discount rate as shown in
Equation 17-4, which is restated as Equation 17-10:
P c
t
n
t
t n
1 1 1ytm
FV
ytm (17-10)
Bond Price Changes
Bond Price Changes Over Time
Assume that we calculate the price of a 20-year bond issued 5 years ago and deter-
mine that it is $910. The bond still has 15 years to maturity. What can we say about
its price over the next 15 years?
With everything else held constant, including market interest rates, bond prices
that differ from the bond’s face value ($1,000) must converge to $1,000 over time.
Why? On a bond’s specified maturity date, it pays its face value or maturity value.
• Over time, holding all other factors constant, a bond’s price must converge
to $1,000 on the maturity date because that is the amount the issuer pays the
bondholder at maturity.
After bonds are issued, they can sell at discounts (prices less than $1,000) and
premiums (prices greater than $1,000) during their lifetimes. Therefore, holding
all other factors constant, a bond selling at a discount will experience a rise in price
over time, and a bond selling at a premium will experience a price decline as the
bond’s remaining life approaches zero.
Figure 17.4 illustrates bond price movements over time assuming constant yields.
Bond 2 illustrates a 10 percent coupon, 30-year bond assuming that its required
yield remains constant at 10 percent. The price of this bond does not change, begin-
ning at $1,000 and ending at $1,000. Bond 1 illustrates an 8 percent coupon, 30-year
bond assuming that its required yield starts, and remains constant, at 10 percent.
Using a financial calculator,
N I/YR PV PMT FV
6 5 ? 35 1,000
Computing the PV, we find the price of the bond is $923.86.
Bond B is valued, as is any other asset, on the basis of its future stream of
benefits (cash flows) using an appropriate market yield. Since the numerator is
always specified for coupon-bearing bonds at time of issuance, the only issue in
valuing a typical bond is to determine the denominator or discount rate
464 Chapter 17 Bond Yields and Prices
Obviously, bond price volatility can work for, as well as against, investors. Money
can be made, and lost, in Treasury securities as well as corporate bonds. The inverse
relation between bond prices and interest rates is a basic principle of bond analysis;
however, a complete understanding of the relation between bond price changes
and interest rate changes requires additional information.
• An increase (decrease) in interest rates will cause bond prices to decline
(increase), but the exact amount of decline will depend on important features
unique to each bond, such as time to maturity and coupon.
We examine each of these in turn.
The effects of maturity The effect an interest rate change has on a bond’s price
depends on the bond’s maturity. An important principle is that for a given change in
market yields, the resulting change in bond price is directly related to time to maturity.
• As interest rates change, the prices of longer-term bonds will change more
than the prices of shorter-term bonds, everything else being equal.
The principle illustrated here is simple but important. Other things being equal,
bond price volatility is a function of maturity.
• Long-term bond prices fluctuate more than do short-term bond prices.
A related principle regarding maturity is as follows: The percentage price change that
occurs as a result of the direct relationship between a bond’s maturity and its price volatility
increases at a diminishing rate as the time to maturity increases.
From Table 17.2, we can see the effect that bond maturity
has on the sensitivity of bond prices to interest rate
changes. For example, for two 10 percent coupon bonds, if market yields
drop from 10 percent to 8 percent, the price of the 15-year bond increases
by $172.92 to $1,172.92, whereas the price of the 30-year bond increases by
$226.23 to $1,226.23.
EXAMPLE 17.13
As we saw above, a drop in market yields from 10 percent
to 8 percent increased the price of the 15-year bond
to $1,172.92, a 17.29 percent change, while the price of the 30-year bond
changed to $1,226.23, a 22.62 percent change. Therefore, although the time
to maturity doubled, the percentage change in price was less than double.
EXAMPLE 17.14
Table 17.2 shows that for the 15-year, 10 percent coupon
bond, the price would be $1,172.92 if market rates were
to decline from 10 percent to 8 percent, resulting in a price appreciation of
$172.92 or 17.29 percent. On the other hand, a rise of 2 percentage points in
market rates from 10 percent to 12 percent results in a price drop to $862.35,
a decline of only $137.65 or 13.77 percent.
Summary 465
The effects of coupon In addition to the maturity effect, the change in the price
of a bond as a result of a change in interest rates depends on the coupon rate of
the bond.
• Bond price fluctuations (volatility) and bond coupon rates are inversely
related.10
The implications of Malkiel’s theorems for investors Malkiel’s theorems lead
to a practical conclusion: the two bond variables of major importance in assessing
the change in bond price, given a change in interest rates, are the bond’s coupon
and its maturity. This conclusion can be summarized as follows: A decline (rise)
in interest rates will cause a rise (decline) in bond prices, with the most sensitivity
in bond prices occurring in longer maturity bonds and bonds with low coupons.
Therefore,
1. A bond buyer, in order to receive the maximum price impact of an expected
drop in interest rates, should purchase low-coupon, long-maturity bonds.
2. A bond investor wishing to alleviate the negative impact of an interest rate
increase should purchase bonds with large coupons and short maturities.
Although investors have no control over market interest rates, they can exercise
control over the coupon and maturity of the bonds they purchase. While the cou-
pon and maturity provide a rough gauge of the impact that yield changes have on
bond prices, the measures are generally considered insufficient indicators for inves-
tors managing bond portfolios.
Investors managing bond portfolios need a measure that takes a bond’s coupon
and its maturity into account and offers a more accurate indicator of the sensitivity
of the bond’s price to yield changes. Such a measure, called duration, is available
and is widely used by bond portfolio managers. Duration is discussed in Chapter 18.
Checking Your Understanding
4. The price of a bond, selling at a premium or discount, will not remain con-
stant over time even if interest rates remain constant. Agree or disagree, and
explain your reasoning.
5. A long-term bond’s price is more sensitive to interest rate changes than the
price of a short-term bond. Why, then, is maturity alone not sufficient to
measure interest rate sensitivity?
Summary
• The level of interest rates for risk-free securities is a function of the real rate
and inflation expectations. Inflation expectations are the primary variable
affecting rates for default-free securities.
• Interest rates vary from the riskless rate as a result of risk premiums.
• The term structure of interest rates denotes the relation between market
yields and time to maturity. A yield curve graphically depicts this relation with
upward-sloping curves being the norm.
10 Note that we are talking about percentage price fluctuations; this relationship does not necessarily hold
if we measure volatility in terms of dollar price changes rather than percentage price changes.
466 Chapter 17 Bond Yields and Prices
• None of the prevalent theories proposed to explain term structure—the
expectations theory, the liquidity preference theory, the preferred habitat
theory, and the market segmentation theory—is dominant.
• Yield spreads reflect the relation between bond yields and particular bond
features such as quality and callability. Differences in type, quality, and coupon
account for most yield spreads.
• The yield to maturity is defined as the promised return an investor will receive
from a bond purchased at the current market price and held to maturity.
• The yield to call is the expected yield to the end of the deferred call period,
when a bond first can be called.
• The horizon return is the total return earned on a bond over some time period
given a specified reinvestment rate.
• Bonds are valued using a present value process. The cash flows for a bond—
interest payments and principal repayment—are discounted at the bond’s
required yield.
• Over time, bond prices will converge to their face value (typically, $1,000) on
the maturity date.
• Bond prices move inversely with interest rates, with price increasing (decreas-
ing) as the required yield decreases (increases).
• The two variables of major importance in assessing the change in price, given
a change in interest rates, are the bond’s coupon and its maturity.
• The sensitivity of bond prices to interest rate changes is directly related to time
to maturity and inversely related to coupon rate.

