470CHAPTER 18
Having chosen to allocate a por-
tion of your inheritance to bonds,
you have only satisfied the first
step in the fixed-income manage-
ment process. By making an alloca-
tion to bonds you have increased
the diversification of your port-
folio, which will help to alleviate
the impact of a large stock mar-
ket decline, such as those that
occurred in 2000–2002 and 2008.
However, there are additional
decisions that need to be made. In
order to effectively manage your
fixed-income allocation, you need
to choose whether to apply an
active or passive approach to the
management of the bond portfolio.
Effective management also requires that you understand how particular bond fea-
tures affect the execution of your investment strategy.
This chapter concludes our discussion of fixed-income securities by analyzing
strategies and approaches to the management of a bond portfolio. We discuss the
major issues that confront investors in selecting and managing their bond portfolio.
The overall objective of the chapter is to provide information regarding how invest-
ment choices impact the risk and return profile of a bond portfolio.
Why Buy Bonds?
Do stocks always outperform bonds in the long run, as many commentators on
investing have stated? Are bonds always destined for a second-place finish? Despite
the fact that this statement is almost always true, exceptions do occur. Consider the
30 years ending September 30, 2011. A long-term government bond index beat
the S&P 500 stock index, 11.5 to 10.8 percent. 1 The major explanation for this
Bonds: Analysis and
Strategy
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain the reasons why investors
buy bonds.
• Differentiate between the passive
and active strategies for managing
a bond portfolio.
• Explain the concept of dura-
tion and how it can be used in
managing bond volatility.
• Describe how convexity relates to
duration and bond price move-
ments.
1 This information is based on Cordell Eddings and Evan Applegate, “Bonds Notch a Rare Win over
Stocks,” Bloomberg Businessweek (November 7–13, 2011): 46, 48.
Why Buy Bonds? 471
was the long decline in interest rates over this period, from 14 percent on Treasury
bonds to less than 3 percent. Thus, bond investors enjoyed capital gains as well as
interest income and did not suffer the losses that stocks suffered in 2000–2002 and
2008. However, such a dramatic decline in interest rates is a very rare event and
not likely to be repeated again anytime soon. Clearly, with the 10-year Treasury rate
hovering around 2 percent, as it was in early 2019, there was little room for further
decline.
Also, bonds outperform other asset classes for shorter periods of time. In 2014,
for example, T-bonds outperformed both U.S. stocks and corporate bonds.
The return on bonds can be separated into two components, which helps to
explain why bonds appeal to both conservative investors seeking steady income and
aggressive investors seeking capital gains. A wide range of investors participate in
the fixed-income market, ranging from individuals who own a few government or
corporate bonds to large institutional investors who own billions of dollars of bonds.
Most of these investors are seeking the basic steady return–low risk characteristics that
most bonds offer; however, quite different overall objectives can be accomplished
by purchasing bonds.
Conservative investors view bonds as fixed-income securities that pay a steady
stream of income. In most cases the risk is small, and Treasury issues are regarded
as having no practical risk of default. These investors tend to use a buy-and-hold
approach. Investors following this strategy seek to maximize their current income
subject to the risk assumed: corporates should return more than Treasuries, BBB
should return more than A or AA or AAA, long maturities should return more than
short maturities, and so on.
The promised yield on a bond held to maturity is known at the time of purchase.
Barring default by the issuer, a buyer has the bond’s principal returned at maturity.
By holding to maturity, an investor can escape the risk a bond’s price will be lower
when it is sold, although other risks (such as inflation risk and reinvestment rate
risk) may not be eliminated.
• As fixed-income securities, bonds are desirable to many investors because they
offer a steady stream of interest income over the bond’s life and a return of
principal at maturity.
While most investors buy “standard” coupon-paying bonds where the payoffs
are known in advance, other types of bonds are available. Some bonds have
yields that depend upon a specified index or are tied to a specific Treasury yield.
Some floating-rate bonds have yields tied to LIBOR (London Interbank Offered
Rate) plus some percentage yield amount. Still others may have yields that
are pegged to inflation. These securities are referenced as structured income-
producing products.
To illustrate the risk and return situation for an investor
who is seeking steady returns, consider long-term bonds
for the period 1926–2017. For the period, investors in Treasury bonds would
have earned an average annual return of 5.5 percent. Over the same period,
corporate bonds earned an average annual return of 6.1 percent. The standard
deviations for these two series were less than half that of stocks. Thus, high-
quality bonds offer a stream of steady returns over long periods of time, with
relatively small risk.
EXAMPLE 18.1
472 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
Other investors are interested in bonds because bond prices change as
interest rates change. If interest rates rise (fall), bond prices fall (rise). These
investors are interested not in holding the bonds to maturity, but rather in
earning the capital gains that accrue if they correctly anticipate movements
in interest rates.
Aggressive investors are interested in capital gains that arise from a change
in interest rates. There is a substantial range of aggressiveness, from the really
short-term speculator to the somewhat less aggressive investor who is willing to
realize capital gains over a longer period while receiving a stream of interest
income.
Short-term speculators study interest rates carefully and move into and out of
securities on the basis of interest rate expectations. If rates are expected to fall,
they buy long-term, low-coupon issues and achieve maximum capital gains if
their interest rate forecast is correct. Treasury bonds can be bought on 10 percent
margin to further magnify gains (or losses). Speculators often use Treasury issues
(the highest quality bond available) or high-grade corporates in doing this kind of
bond trading. It is not necessary to resort to low-quality bonds when speculating on
interest rate changes.
Of course, losses also occur as a result of interest rate changes, both for longer
periods and for short periods.
In the past, bonds were viewed as very stable instruments whose prices fluctu-
ated very little in the short run. However, this situation changed drastically in the
1980s when the bond markets became quite volatile. Interest rates in the early 1980s
reached record levels, causing large changes in bond prices.
Investments Insight
Of Course, Not Everything Goes
as Expected
Despite the typical steady performance of bonds
over time, the situation can be reversed during
unusual conditions such as a financial crisis. Con-
sider an investor in 1985 holding 10-year Treasuries.
The coupon was 10 percent, and inflation was
about 4 percent, leaving a real return of approx-
imately 6 percent. Now consider an investor in
2017 holding 10-year Treasuries. The coupon was
2 percent, which was approximately equal to infla-
tion. Thus, the real return was zero. If the investor
held these securities in a taxable account, taxes
were due on the interest. Therefore, on a real basis,
the investor was paying the government to hold
these securities and earning a negative real
return. This helps to illustrate that even conserva-
tive bond investors face a wide range of situations.
To obtain an idea of the returns possible from changes
in interest rates, consider long-term T-bond returns over
some selected years. In 1982, the return was approximately 42 percent; in
1985, 32 percent; in 1995, 31 percent; in 2000, 20 percent; in 2011, 35 percent;
and in 2014, 30 percent. Clearly, successful bond speculation in each of these
years resulted in very large return
Why Buy Bonds? 473
Bond speculators encompass a wide range of participants, from financial institu-
tions to individual investors. All are trying to take advantage of an expected move-
ment in interest rates. Thus, investors seeking the income component from bonds,
as well as investors attempting to speculate with bonds, are keenly interested in the
level of interest rates and any likely rate changes. A critical part of bond strategy and
management, therefore, must involve interest rate considerations.
Buying Foreign Bonds
How important are foreign bonds in the total investing environment? Foreign bond
markets account for approximately 60 percent of the fixed-income opportunities
available on a global basis; in 1990, they accounted for only one-third. In spite of the
size of the foreign bond market, U.S. investors generally have little, if any, foreign
bond exposure. U.S. investors should consider foreign bonds for their portfolios for
the following reasons:
1. Foreign bonds often offer higher returns than alternative domestic bonds.
Thus, investors can make a good case for buying foreign bonds on the basis
of potentially attractive returns.
2. Foreign bonds expand diversification benefits, which are extremely impor-
tant, both in stock and bond portfolios.
Individual investors often find it difficult to invest directly in foreign bonds. Some
brokerage firms do not offer foreign bonds to individual investors, while most that
do require a minimum investment of at least $50,000. Selling foreign bonds that are
directly owned also can be a problem. Secondary markets in most foreign countries
are not comparable to the huge U.S. bond market. This means that individual inves-
tors selling small amounts of foreign bonds abroad will typically incur significant
price concessions. In addition, these investors face transaction costs. Dollars must
be converted into the foreign currency to make purchases, and receipts from the
foreign bonds must be converted back into dollars. On small transactions, these
costs can significantly impact returns.
• Given the difficulties involved, most investors buying foreign bonds do so via
mutual funds or exchange-traded funds (ETFs).
From September 28, 2016, to December 16, 2016, the
10-year T-bond rate went from 1.6 to 2.6 percent, and
the value of these bonds went down more than 9 percent. Thus, in only three
months, holders of this security could have experienced a negative price
change of 9 percent on a bond instrument typically considered default-free.
EXAMPLE 18.3
In 2014, Vanguard’s total international bond fund
returned 8.82 percent versus only 5.89 percent for its
total U.S. bond fund. However, its emerging market bond fund returned only
4.34 percent in 2014, less than half the return of the total international bond
fund
474 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
What about currency risk? Investors in foreign bonds (or any other foreign
security) face exchange rate risk, which can be favorable or unfavorable. The euro
strengthened against the dollar for several years of the new decade, providing a cur-
rency gain to U.S. investors. In contrast, in 2014, the euro weakened substantially
against the dollar, which caused a significant loss for U.S. investors holding euro-
denominated bonds.
Investors buying mutual funds can choose foreign bond funds that hedge their
currency exposure. When a fund does this, a U.S. investor earns a return close to
what local investors would earn on bonds. On the other hand, investors seeking cur-
rency exposure in the bond area can choose unhedged funds.
Important Considerations in Managing
a Bond Portfolio
Understanding the Bond Market
To be successful, investors must understand the relationship between the bond mar-
ket and the economy as a whole. It is commonplace to talk about the bond market
benefiting from a weak economy. If the economy is growing slowly, interest rates
often decline, and bond prices rise. In effect, a decline in economic growth can
lead to fewer investment opportunities, inducing savers to increase their demand
for bonds, which pushes bond prices up and bond yields down. A rapidly growing
economy can frighten bond investors because strong economic activity often pushes
interest rates up and bond prices down.
Another important relationship is between bond yields and inflation. If
investors anticipate a rise in inflation, they demand more from a bond to com-
pensate for the expected decline in the purchasing power of a bond’s cash
flows. An increase in expected inflation will tend to depress bond prices and
increase yields.
Some Practical Advice
The quest for higher bond yields has led
investment firms to offer emerging market bond
funds. For example, Vanguard created its emerg-
ing market bond fund in May 2013. While the
fund offers investors the potential for greater
returns, the higher potential returns come with
higher risk and higher transactions costs. Van-
guard’s emerging market bond fund has an
expense ratio of 0.34 percent versus only 0.08
percent for its total bond fund.
The T. Rowe Price International Bond Fund provides U.S.
investors with diversification away from U.S. markets. The
fund invests heavily in government bonds from developed countries, although
it also invests modestly in foreign corporate issues and emerging market debt.
The fund is exposed to currency risk, which increases its potential volatility.
During a particular time period, this exposure to currency risk can work for
or against investors
Bond Strategies and Techniques 475
• While the bond market appears to prefer a neutral to weak economy with its
lower interest rates, the bond market clearly dislikes inflation.
Bond investors fear inflation because of its negative effect on fixed-income securi-
ties, and they favor Fed actions that temper economic growth and reduce inflation.
Not surprisingly, typical relationships between economic data and yields do not
always hold. In December 2011, economic data came in better than expected. This
would normally suggest rising interest rates. Instead, the 10-year T-bond yield ended
the year below 2 percent. Fears about the European debt crisis and doubts about
the U.S. economy led investors to seek the safety of Treasury debt, even at record
low yields.
Global Factors and the U.S. Bond Markets
Global crises can have a significant impact on the U.S. bond market. When the
Brazilian crisis erupted around the end of 1998, there was a flight to safety in the
form of purchases of Treasuries. As the crisis diminished, this demand for Treasur-
ies decreased.
A notable impact of foreign factors on U.S. bond prices, particularly Treasuries,
occurred during the European sovereign debt and bond crisis in 2011. With Greece
on the brink of bankruptcy and Italy, Spain, and Portugal facing major debt prob-
lems, a flight to safety was common. Investors sought the relative safety of Treas-
ury securities given all the turmoil. As one source noted on September 12, 2011:
“Investors continued to pile into Treasuries Monday as the intensifying debt crisis
in Europe sparked a broad flight to safety.”2 The result of this reallocation to lower
risk bonds was that yields on 10-year Treasuries fell below 2 percent in late 2011 and
remained largely below that level until mid-2013.
Checking Your Understanding
1. During the first several years of the 21st century, the euro strengthened rela-
tive to the dollar. How did this affect U.S. investors in European bonds?
2. Bond investors are often said to react favorably to a Federal Reserve move-
ment to tighten monetary policy. What is the explanation for this?
3. What are the two most important reasons for a U.S. investor to buy foreign
bonds?
4. Given an economy that is growing better than expected, is it rational for bond
holders to sell?
Bond Strategies and Techniques
Bond investing has become increasingly popular, which has driven interest rates to
record low levels in recent years. Unfortunately, bonds generally do not receive the
same amount of attention from individual investors as common stocks. A majority
of individual investors are simply more interested in owning stocks than in owning
bonds. Stocks are more “glamorous,” and more attention is devoted to them. Fur-
thermore, more data exist for common stocks, undoubtedly because most stocks
2 Ben Rooney, “Treasury Yields Hit Record Lows on Euro Turmoil,” money.cnn.com, September 12, 2011.
476 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
trade on exchanges where detailed prices can be collected and analyzed. The same
is not true for bonds. Even today investors have difficulty obtaining instantaneous
current quotes on many bonds.
Despite the lesser emphasis on bond portfolio management, investors must man-
age their bond portfolios and make investment decisions. Investors adopt different
strategies, depending on their risk preferences, knowledge of the bond market, and
investment objectives. Two broad strategies that any investor can follow with any
type of portfolio are the passive and active strategies.
We know that bond prices change as interest rates change. Investors need to be
able to make reasonable estimates of bond price changes if interest rates change by
a specified amount. Therefore, as part of our consideration of bond strategies and
management techniques, we analyze how investors can accurately assess bond price
volatility. We also consider how investors can protect a bond portfolio against inter-
est rate movements.
Passive Management Strategies
Many investors agree that securities are fairly priced in that the expected return is
commensurate with the risk taken. Passive bond strategies are based on the proposi-
tion that bond prices are determined rationally, leaving risk as the portfolio variable
to control. Strategies for investors following a passive approach include buy and
hold and indexing.
Passive strategies have a lower cost than do active strategies. Costs are a key deter-
minant in a fund’s success over time, and this is particularly true for bonds because
bond returns are typically lower than stock returns.
• Passive management strategies are based on inputs that are known at the time,
rather than expectations.
Passive management does not mean that investors maintain their current bond
holdings even when market conditions change unexpectedly. Investors must moni-
tor the status of their portfolios in order to match their holdings with their risk
preferences and objectives. Conditions in the financial markets change quickly, and
hence investors must make fast changes when necessary. Thus, a passive investment
strategy does not mean that investors do nothing.
The passive approach to bond investing is supported by evidence showing that
the performance of bond managers failed to equal that of a market index. For
example, the SPIVA Scorecard reports that over 85 percent of investment-grade
long-bond funds reported 5-year performance that was inferior to that of their
benchmark. Likewise, more than 90 percent of high yield funds underperformed
over a 5-year period. 3 Thus, the average pension fund holding these securities would
have done better with an index fund.
A comprehensive study examining the performance of bond mutual funds found
that such funds underperformed relevant bond indexes.4 The results were robust
across a wide choice of models. For the most part, this underperformance approxi-
mated the average management fees; therefore, before expenses, funds performed
about as well as the indexes.
478 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
as the Barclays Capital Aggregate Bond Index. 5 Mutual funds designed to match
the performance of an index are known as index funds. While the typical actively
managed bond fund has an expense ratio that may approach 1 percent, the average
expense ratio of bond index funds is less than half that amount. ETFs are another
alternative, and they often have very low expense ratios.
How important are expense ratios for bond funds? Extremely important! With
high-grade corporates yielding 3 percent and Treasuries even less, the impact of a
0.05 percent expense ratio versus about 1 percent subtracted from these returns is
obvious.
Active Management Strategies
Many investors purchase bonds planning to hold them to maturity; however, other
bond investors use active management strategies. These strategies have traditionally
sought to profit from active management of bonds by:
1. Taking speculative bond positions based on forecasting changes in interest
rates
2. Identifying abnormal yield spreads between bond sectors and acting to take
advantage of these discrepancies
3. Identifying relative mispricing between fixed-income securities with differing
features and taking appropriate positions
Notice that, unlike the passive strategy, the key bond features targeted are not
known until after the analysis is completed. Instead, investors form expectations
about interest rate changes, yield spreads, and security mispricings and take bond
positions thereafter.
We consider several active strategies; however, this is a nonexhaustive list of
strategies.
The Vanguard Total Bond Market Index is one of the largest
bond index funds. Its expense ratio is a mere 0.05 percent,
which Vanguard states is on average 93 percent lower than other bond funds
with similar holdings.6 Vanguard also offers Vanguard Total Bond Market ETF
with similar holdings and the same 0.05 percent expense ratio.
EXAMPLE 18.7
Some Practical Advice
Barclays offers several iShares ETFs concentrating
on both corporate and Treasury bonds such
as iShares Barclay U.S. Aggregate Bond Fund.
Vanguard offers the Vanguard Total Bond Market
ETF and the Vanguard Short-Term Bond ETF and
Long-Term Bond ETF. For investors with a greater
risk appetite, Vanguard offers a high-yield corpo-
rate bond fund.
5 The Barclays Capital Aggregate Bond Index covers more than 6,000 securities. Most bond index funds
use a sampling approach to replicate the index as closely as possible.
6 This expense ratio is for the Admiral Shares, which require a higher initial investment.
Active Management Strategies 479
Forecasting Changes in Interest Rates
Changes in interest rates are the chief factor affecting bond prices. There is an
inverse relationship between changes in bond prices and changes in interest rates;
however, the relationship is influenced by bond features. When investors project
interest rate declines, they should take action to invest in bonds with the right fea-
tures to optimize price appreciation opportunities. When interest rates are expected
to rise, the objective is to minimize losses by not holding bonds or holding bonds
with the appropriate characteristics.
How does an investor forecast interest rates? Sadly, the answer has commonly
been, “not very well.” Interest rate forecasting is a notoriously difficult proposition.
Consider this quote concerning the yield on 10-year T-bonds: “Strategists at Credit
Suisse predicted the yield will tumble to as low as 1.5 percent during the first half
of 2012. But analysts at Nomura expect the yield to rise to 2.4 percent in the next
few months.”7
Reasonable forecasts can sometimes be made about the likely growth rate of the
economy and the prospects for inflation, both of which affect interest rates and,
therefore, bond prices. Assuming an investor has a forecast of interest rates, he or
she should lengthen (shorten) a bond portfolio’s maturity when interest rates are
expected to decline (rise).
Bond maturity impacts investment performance in important ways:
1. Short maturities sacrifice price appreciation opportunities and usually offer
lower coupons (income) but serve to protect the investor if rates rise.
2. Longer maturities have greater price fluctuations; therefore, the chance for
bigger gains (and bigger losses) is magnified. They also tend to pay higher
coupons; however, longer maturities are generally less liquid than shorter-
term securities.
• An important component in forecasting interest rates is the yield curve. The
shape of the yield curve contains valuable information about the future course
of interest rates. Bond market participants, pay close attention to yield curves
as an aid in forecasting interest rates and in deciding what segments of the
bond market to target.
One form of interest rate forecasting, horizon analysis, involves the projection
of bond performance over a planned investment horizon. The investor evaluates
bonds over a selected holding period in order to determine which will perform
the best. To do this, the investor must make assumptions about reinvestment rates
A report from Fidelity’s Investment Grade Bond Fund
made the following observation: “Yield curve positioning
was a solid contributor to fund performance during the year while the
yield curve flattened. The fund benefited from the barbell style yield curve
positioning it employed with investments concentrated to a higher degree on
the short and long ends of the yield curve and to a lesser degree in between.”
EXAMPLE 18.8
7 Min Zeng, “Treasuries End Year Below 2% for the First Time Since ‘77,” The Wall Street Journal online
(December 30, 2011).
480 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
and future market rates and calculate the horizon returns for the bonds. Note that
this concept is different from the yield-to-maturity concept, which does not require
future interest rate expectations to be integrated into the analysis. Horizon analysis
requires users to make assumptions about reinvestment rates and future yields but
allows them to consider how different scenarios will affect bond performance.
• Always remember that interest rate forecasts are notoriously inaccurate. While
a particular forecaster may get it right one time, the same forecaster probably
will not the next time.
Yield Spread Analysis
In Chapter 17, we discussed the risk premiums that help to explain why rates differ
between bonds with different features or issuers. We can categorize the differences
between two segments of the bond market as a yield spread. As we know, the bond
market comprises different sectors based on issuer (the Treasury, corporations, and
so forth), quality (Treasury, government agency, AAA, AA, A, BBB, below invest-
ment grade), or call feature (callable or noncallable).
Yield spread analysis involves analyzing the differences in promised yields between
segments of the bond market. Investors monitor yield relationships between types of
bonds and look for abnormalities based on their beliefs regarding normal spreads.
Using these strategies, investors sell bonds in one sector and buy bonds in another
sector in the hopes of profiting as the yield spread moves from its current level to
its “normal” level.
• Yield spread strategies seek to profit from an expected change in the yield
spreads between bond sectors, based on an assumption that there exists some
normal yield spread level between sectors.
During periods of economic expansion, the spread between Treasury issues and
corporate issues (the credit spread) generally narrows, reflecting corporate bonds’
Some Practical Advice
Assume that you expect interest rates to decline
over the next two years and you want to use
bonds to capitalize on the move. A good way
would be to use T-bonds, which are default-free,
exempt from state and local taxes, and not
callable. You could buy long-term Treasuries, such
as the 30-year bond issued in February 2018. If
you are right in your forecast, percentage returns
will be large.
The Fed started raising short-term interest rates in June
2004 and raised them 14 times through early 2006. When
the raises started, the 10-year Treasury note yielded about 4.6 percent and by
February 2006, the yield stood at 4.54 percent. Thus, long-term rates did not
follow the rise in short-term rates as most expected. Even the chairman of the
Fed called the failure of long-term rates to rise a “conundrum."
decreased credit risk. Conversely, during periods of economic weakness, the credit
spread generally widens, reflecting the increased credit risk. Thus, if an expansion
is forecast, a manager purchases corporates and sells Treasuries in anticipation
of greater price appreciation or less price erosion due to the spread narrowing. In
contrast, if the economy is expected to weaken, the manager sells corporates and
buys Treasuries to reduce the price loss due to the spread widening.
If a spread is considered abnormally high, investors trade to take advantage of a
return to a normal spread. The objective is to invest in sectors that will display the
strongest relative price movements. Historical records of yield spreads are available
from brokerage firms.
What can cause the credit spread to widen?
• A financial crisis, such as occurred in 2008, when the spread between high-
yield bonds and Treasuries reached as high as 2,000 basis points
• Accounting debacles, such as those in 2002 involving WorldCom, Enron, and
Tyco
• Litigation problems, such as Halliburton and other firms with asbestos
exposure
• Excessive debt levels, which increase the risk of default and bankruptcy
• Weak earnings, which increases the risk that a company cannot service
its debt
Smart bond investors understand that not all corporate yield spreads are justi-
fied. Markets sometimes overreact by being caught up in a current environment of
despair or panic. Some investors look for such opportunities.
Identifying Mispricing Among Bonds
Managers of bond portfolios attempt to adjust to the constantly changing market
environment. They seek to improve bond portfolio returns by identifying tempo-
rary mispricings in the bond market, which do occur.
Bond swaps refer to selling one bond and simultaneously buying a different
bond. There are various types of swaps, but all are designed to improve the inves-
tor’s portfolio position. Some swaps are relatively straightforward, simple transac-
tions, while others are very complex. Various inputs are required to perform a swap
analysis, including most importantly predictions about future interest rates. Also, a
time horizon is needed as an input, with a typical time horizon in the range of six
months to a year.
Some active mutual fund managers have outperformed their bond benchmarks
over respectable periods of time due to mispricings or inefficiencies in the bond
market. According to Morningstar, 37 out of the 338 funds in the intermediate-term
Bond Swaps An active
bond management strat-
egy involving the purchase
and sale of bonds in an
attempt to improve the
return on a bond portfolio
Consider the credit spread, as reflected by the difference
in rates between 10-year Treasuries and corporate Baa
bonds. In 2008, the spread widened to as much as 6.1 percent versus the
average of about 2 percent. Due to the economic turmoil, investors rushed to
Treasury securities (a “flight to safety”), pushing their price up and their yield
down.
category outperformed the Aggregate Bond index’s gain over a 10-year period. 8 The
Pimco Total Return Fund is often cited as an outstanding actively managed bond
fund that frequently outperforms its index. From its inception in 1987 through
2013, the fund’s performance surpassed 96 percent of its peers; however, the fund
experienced turmoil in 2014 when Bill Gross, the fund’s manager, unexpectedly left
the fund to join Janus Capital Group.
New Tools for Individual Investors
Traditionally, the bond market has been an institutional market and one not friendly
to individual investors. Up-to-date price information was not easily available, and
investors could not be sure that the prices they paid were fair because they were not
transparent. This situation has changed dramatically with the Internet.
Consider Fidelity Investments, which has a set of online tools and research for
investors.9 Investors can search through approximately 50,000 bonds, bond funds,
and CDs and sort them in various ways. Transaction costs for trading the bonds are
extremely low and transparent. Fidelity offers investors a bond ladder tool, which
they can use to construct a portfolio that will provide a steady stream of income.
Managing Price Volatility
We know from Chapter 17, that coupon and maturity are the primary factors affect-
ing bond price volatility. When yields change, these are the two primary features that
determine how much a bond’s price will change. To properly manage bond price
volatility, we need a measure that combines these two features. Duration is such a
measure. It combines the properties of maturity and coupon and allows investors to
estimate a bond’s price change for any estimated change in interest rates.
Duration
Although maturity is the traditional measure of a bond’s lifetime, it is inadequate
because it reflects only the time to the return of principal at the maturity date. Two
20-year bonds, one with a 4 percent coupon and the other with a 9 percent coupon, do
Investments Intuition
The Best Laid Plans of Mice and Men
Can Backfire
Even the best bond fund managers make incor-
rect guesses about bond prices and interest
rates, particularly during turbulent times. In late
2011, some of the top managers were making
positive bets on emerging market debt secu-
rities and negative bets on Treasury securities.
However, the eurozone’s sovereign debt crisis,
which dominated the news in late 2011, turned
these bets upside down. Investors rushed to the
perceived safety of T-bonds, providing one of
the largest price rallies seen in Treasuries, and
relatively poor returns in more risky assets such as
emerging market debt
not have identical economic lifetimes. An investor will recover the original purchase
price much sooner with the 9 percent coupon bond compared to the 4 percent cou-
pon bond. Therefore, a measure is needed that accounts for the entire pattern (both
size and timing) of the cash flows over a bond’s life. Such a measure, called duration
(or Macaulay duration), was conceived many years ago by Frederick Macaulay.
Duration is a present-value weighted average of the number of years over which
investors receive cash flows from a bond.10 It measures the economic life of a bond
rather than simply its time to maturity.
Figure 18.1 illustrates the concepts of both time to maturity and duration for a
bond with five years to maturity and, a 10 percent coupon. As shown, the stream of
cash flows generated consists of $50 every six months, plus the return of principal of
$1,000 at the end of five years. The last cash flow combines the interest payment of
$50 with the principal repayment of $1,000.
Although the term to maturity for the bond illustrated in Figure 18.1 is 5 years,
its duration is only 4.054 years, as indicated by the arrow. This means that the time-
value- of- money weighted average number of years needed to recover the bond’s
cost is 4.054. In effect, the arrow indicates the point where the weights, which are
the cash flows, are in balance on either side.
While the bond has five years to maturity, interest payments are received in each
of the first four years. Therefore, describing the bond as a five-year bond is not totally
accurate because the average time to receipt of the cash flows is clearly less than five
years. Duration describes the weighted average time to receipt of the bond’s payments.
It is very unusual for a coupon-paying bond to have a duration greater than
10 years, regardless of its maturity date. This is because cash flows far in the future
have small present values today. The only payment from a zero-coupon bond is its
face value, thus, a zero-coupon bond’s duration equals its maturity.
• A zero-coupon bond has a duration equal to its maturity because there are no
coupons.
Duration A measure of a
bond’s economic lifetime
that accounts for the
entire pattern of cash
flows; a measure of bond
price sensitivity to interest
rate movements
0
200
400
Cash flows received from owning bond
600
800
1,000
1,200
Time in years 4.054
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
FIGURE 18.1 Illustration of the cash flow pattern of a 10 percent coupon, five-year maturity bond
paying semiannual interest
10 This discussion applies only to option-free bonds.
484 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
Calculating duration To calculate duration, it is necessary to calculate a weighted
time period because duration is stated in years. The time periods in which the cash
flows are received are expressed in terms of years (or semiannual periods) and
denoted by t in this discussion. Weighting and summing these ts produces the dura-
tion measure, which is stated in years.
• Duration is a measure stated in years.
The present values of the cash flows, as a percentage of the bond’s current price,
serve as the weighting factors applied to the time periods. Each weighting factor
reflects the relative importance of each cash flow to the bond’s total present value,
which is simply its current price. The sum of these weighting factors is 1.0, indicat-
ing that all cash flows have been accounted for. The sum of the bond’s discounted
cash flows equals the bond’s price.
The equation for duration is shown as Equation 18-1:
Macaulay duration price
D t
t
n t
1
PV CF (18-1)
where
( )
the time period at which the cash flow is expected to be received
the number of periods to maturity
present value of the cash flow in period discounted at the yieldPV CF
to maturity
price the bond
t
t
n
t
=
=
=
= s current price or present value of all the cash flows’
Table 18.1 shows the duration calculation for a 5 percent,
five-year bond. The bond is priced at $974.17 because
interest rates have risen so that the current yield to maturity (YTM) is 5.6 percent
(ytm is 2.8 percent).11
The cash flows, column 2, consist of ten $25 coupons (the annual coupon
is $50) plus the return of principal at the end of the fifth year. Column 3
shows the present value of the cash flows using 2.8 percent as the discount
rate. Column 4 shows the weights, or the present value of the cash flows as
a percentage of the bond’s price. Notice that the final cash flow of $1,025
($25 coupon plus $1,000 principal) accounts for 79.8 percent of the bond
value on a weighted average basis. Column 5 is calculated by multiplying the
weights in column 4 by the time periods in column 1 and summing these
products. The end result, 4.48 years, is the present-value weighted average
number of years over which investors receive cash flows from the bond,
which is the bond’s duration.
The duration of 4.48 years is approximately one-half year less than the term
to maturity of 5 years.
EXAMPLE 18.11
11 A shortcut formula can be used for coupon bonds selling at face value:
Duration 1 1 1
1
YTM
YTM YTM( )n
Using the semiannual rate and doubling the number of periods, we must divide the answer by 2.0 to put
it on an annual basis.
Managing Price Volatility 485
As Equation 18-1 shows, duration is obtained by multiplying the weighted pre-
sent value of each period’s cash flow by the period in which it is received and sum-
ming. Note that duration is expressed in years because we are calculating a weighted
average of the number of years.
• Duration is always less than time to maturity for bonds that pay coupons. For
zero-coupon bonds, duration is equal to time to maturity.
Understanding duration How is duration related to the key bond variables previ-
ously analyzed? An examination of Equation 18-1 shows that the calculation of dura-
tion depends on three factors12
:
• The time to maturity of the bond
• The coupon payments
• The yield to maturity (YTM)
1. Duration expands with time to maturity but at a decreasing rate (hold-
ing coupon payments and YTM constant). Even between 5 and 10 years
time to maturity, duration expands at a significantly slower pace than for a
maturity up to five years, where it expands rapidly.13 For all coupon-paying
Duration Calculation of a Bond with a 5 Percent Coupon,
Five-Year Maturity, Currently Priced at $974.17 with a YTM
of 5.6 Percent
(1) Periods
(2) Cash
Flow (CF)
(3) PV
of CFs
(4) Weighted PV
of CFs (3)/Bond
Price
(5) Weighted
Average of Time
Periods (1) × (4)
0.5 25 24.319 0.025 0.012
1 25 23.657 0.024 0.024
1.5 25 23.012 0.024 0.035
2 25 22.386 0.023 0.046
2.5 25 21.776 0.022 0.056
3 25 21.183 0.022 0.065
3.5 25 20.606 0.021 0.074
4 25 20.044 0.021 0.082
4.5 25 19.499 0.020 0.090
5 1025 777.665 0.798 3.991
1.000 4.477
486 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
bonds, duration is less than maturity. For a zero-coupon bond, duration is
equal to time to maturity.14
2. Duration is inversely related to YTM (holding coupon payments and matu-
rity constant).
3. Duration is inversely related to the size of the coupon payments (holding
maturity and YTM constant). This is logical because higher coupons lead
to quicker recovery of the bond’s value, resulting in a shorter duration.
Duration and bond management Why is duration important in bond analysis
and management? First, it tells us the difference between the effective lives of alter-
native bonds. Bonds A and B, with the same duration but different years to maturity,
have more in common than bonds C and D with the same maturity but different
durations. For any particular bond, as maturity increases, the duration increases at
a decreasing rate.
Second, the duration concept is used in certain bond management strategies,
particularly immunization, as explained later.
Third, and most importantly for bond investors, duration is a measure of bond
price sensitivity to interest rate movements; that is, it is a direct measure of interest
rate risk.
Estimating price changes using duration Bond price changes are directly
related to duration; that is, the percentage change in a bond’s price, given a change
in interest rates, is proportional to its duration. Therefore, duration can be used to
measure interest rate exposure.
• Duration measures the approximate percentage change in price for a
1- percentage- point (100 basis points) change in interest rates. This can be
implemented by using modified duration.
Modified duration, shown in Equation 18-2, equals Macaulay’s duration divided
by (1 + ytm).15
Modified duration D D
* ( )1 ytm (18-2)
Modified Duration
Duration divided by
1 + ytm
Consider a 10 percent bond with a YTM of 10 percent
and a five-year life. This bond’s duration is 4.054 years,
approximately 1 year less than maturity. However, if the maturity was 10 years,
it would have an effective life (duration) of 6.76 years, and with a 20-year
maturity, it would have a duration of only 9.36 years. Furthermore, a 50-year
maturity would change duration to only 10.91 years. The reason for the sharp
differences between the term to maturity and the duration is that cash receipts
received in the distant future have very small present values and, therefore,
add little to a bond’s value
Managing Price Volatility 487
where
Macaulay duration in years
the bond s semiannual YTM (we divide YTM by the number of
discounting periods,which for semiannual bond payments is 2)
D =
=ytm ’
The modified duration can be used to calculate a bond’s percentage price
change for a given change in yield. This is shown by Equation 18-3, which is an
approximation16
:
percentage change in bond price yield changeD * (18-3)
Or
P
P D r* (18-4)
where
P
P
D
change in price
the price of the bond
duration with* a negative sign the negative sign reflects the inverse
r
(
eelation between price changes and yield
the instantane
)
r oous change in yield in decimal form
Using the duration of 4.054 years from Example 18.12
and the YTM of 10 percent, the modified duration is
D* .
( . ) .
4 054
1 0 05 3 861
EXAMPLE 18.13
Using our same bond with a modified duration of 3.861,
assume an instantaneous yield increase of 20 basis points
(+0.002), from 10 to 10.20 percent. The approximate change in price based
on Equation 18-4 is
P
P 3 861 100 0 772. ( ) . %0.002
Given the original price is $1,000, this percentage price change results in an
estimated bond price of $992.28. For very small changes in yield, Equation 18-4
produces a good approximation.17
EXAMPLE 18.14
16 This formula can provide an exact estimate of the percentage price change if the change in yield is very
small and the security does not involve embedded options.
17 To prove this, we solve for the bond price using a YTM of 10.20 percent. We find that the price declines
to $992.32, a percentage decline of 0.768 percent as compared to our estimate of 0.772 percent. For
larger changes in yield, such as 100 or 200 basis points, the equation is less accurate.
488 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
The steps involved in calculating the approximate price change in the bond are
illustrated in Figure 18.2 using the information in Example 18.14.
In summary, for small changes in a bond’s required yield, modified duration
shows the bond’s percentage price change for a 1-percentage-point change (100
basis points) in its yield. Modified duration measures the price risk of a bond or a
portfolio since the same holds true for a portfolio of bonds.
Convexity Although Equation 18-3 provides only an approximation, for very
small changes in the required yield, the approximation is quite close and at times is
exact. However, as the changes in required yield become larger, the approximation
becomes poorer. The problem is that modified duration produces symmetric linear
percentage price change estimates (if r had decreased 0.20 percent, the predicted
price change would have been +0.772 percent) when, in actuality, the price–yield
relationship is not linear, nor is it symmetric. The relationship is, in fact, curvilinear.
We refer to the curved nature of the price–yield relationship as the bond’s
convexity (the relationship is said to be convex because it opens upward). More
Concepts in Action
Using Duration in Managing Bond Portfolios
Let’s see how these concepts are used in
practice. The Nuveen Select Tax-Free Income 2
closed-end fund had an average modified
duration of 5.4 in Spring 2008; “That suggests that
the fund’s net asset value (NAV) per share would
fall about 5.4 percent if interest rates rose by
1 percentage point.” 18
Bond fund investors can obtain information
about the fund’s duration directly from the fund
company. For example, if you own a Fidelity
bond fund, go to the fund’s website and look
up the fund of interest. Alternatively, Morning-
star’s website provides duration information for
bond funds.
Step 1
• Start with Macaulay duration
• Macaulay duration = 4.054
Step 2
• Calculate modified duration based on semiannual interest of
0.05
• Modified duration = 4.054/1.05 = 3.861
Step 3
• Calculate approximate price change for a bond given a yield change
of 20 basis points
• Approximate price change = –3.861 × (+0.0020) × 100 = –0.772%
FIGURE 18.2 Calculating the approximate price change for a bond
18 Elizabeth Ody, “Buy Munis at a Discount,” Kiplinger’s Personal Finance (May 2008
490 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
Effective duration When a bond has a feature that allows for its cash flows to
change when yields change, investors should consider the bond’s effective dura-
tion. For example, with a callable or floating-rate bond, the Macaulay and modified
duration measures can produce poor estimates of the bond’s interest rate sensitivity.
A more accurate measure of interest rate risk for such bonds is their effective dura-
tion, which is measured as follows:
Effective duration P P
P y2 0
where
P y
P
is the bond s price given a yield decrease of
is the
’
bond s price given a yield increase of
is the curren
’ y
P0 tt bond price
is the given change in yield used to computy ee the price changes
For a bond whose cash flows do not change with a change in interest rates, the
bond’s effective duration equals its modified duration.
Checking Your Understanding
5. Holding maturity constant, a bond with a larger coupon will have a shorter
duration than a bond with a smaller coupon. Agree or disagree, and explain
your reasoning.
6. Using the duration concept, if you expect a decline in interest rates, and you
want to use this decline to your advantage, how should you adjust your bond
portfolio?
Managing Price Volatility
What are the ramifications of a security’s duration for bond investors? The message
is simple—to obtain the maximum (minimum) price volatility from a bond, inves-
tors should choose bonds with the longest (shortest) duration. If an investor already
owns a portfolio of bonds, he or she can act to increase the average duration if a
decline in interest rates is projected. Fortunately, duration is additive, which means
that a bond portfolio’s duration is a (market-value) weighted average of each indi-
vidual bond’s duration.
How popular is the duration concept in practice? Duration has become widely
known and referred to in the popular press. Investors can find duration numbers in
a variety of sources, particularly with regard to bond funds.
Although duration is an important measure of bond risk, it is not necessarily always
the most appropriate one. Duration measures volatility, which is important but is only
one aspect of bond risk. If an investor considers volatility an acceptable proxy for risk,
duration is the measure of risk to use along with the correction for convexity.
Immunization
Because interest rates change over time, investors face uncertainty about the realized
returns from bonds. This, of course, is the nature of interest rate risk. The strategy
Immunization 491
of immunizing (protecting) a portfolio against interest rate risk (i.e., changes in the
general level of interest rates) is called immunization. This is one form of a struc-
tured portfolio strategy, which aims to achieve an objective that has been specified
beforehand.
To see how such a strategy works, think of interest rate risk as being composed
of two parts:
1. Price risk, resulting from the inverse relationship between bond prices and
required returns.
2. Reinvestment rate risk, resulting from the uncertainty about the rate at which
future coupon income can be reinvested. The YTM calculation assumes that
future coupons are reinvested at the calculated YTM. If interest rates change
so that this assumption is no longer operable, the bond’s realized return will
differ from the calculated YTM.
Notice that these two components of interest rate risk move in opposite
directions:
• If interest rates rise, reinvestment rates (and therefore income) rise, whereas
the price of the bond declines.
• If interest rates decline, reinvestment rates (and therefore interest on interest)
decline, whereas the price of the bond rises.
In effect, the favorable results on one side can be used to offset the unfavorable
results on the other.
• Immunization involves protecting a bond portfolio against interest rate risk by
canceling out the two components of interest rate risk, reinvestment rate risk
and price risk.
A portfolio is said to be immunized (the effects of interest rate risk are neutral-
ized) if the duration of the portfolio is made equal to a preselected investment
horizon.
Note carefully what this statement says. An investor with, say, a 10-year investment
horizon does not choose bonds with 10 years to maturity but bonds with a duration
of 10 years. The duration strategy usually requires holding bonds with maturities
longer than the investment horizon to make the duration match the investment
horizon.
• The duration concept is the basis for immunization theory.
Exhibit 18.1 outlines the concept of immunization, showing the essential points.
• Immunization protects against the adverse consequences of interest rate risk,
thereby allowing the portfolio holder to achieve a prespecified return.
For an example of the immunization concept, consider Table 18.2. 21 Assume that
an investor has a five-year investment horizon after which she wishes to liquidate
her bond portfolio. The current YTM for AAA-rated bonds is 7.9 percent for both
five- and six-year bonds because of the flatness of the yield curve. To simplify the
calculations, we assume that interest is paid annually so that we can concentrate on
the immunization principle.
Immunization The
strategy of immunizing
(protecting) a portfolio
against interest rate risk by
canceling out its two com-
ponents, price risk and
reinvestment rate risk
21 We assume here that the yield curve is flat and that any changes in the yield curve are parallel changes.
492 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
Because the YTM is 7.9 percent, the ending wealth ratio should be (1.079)5
, or
$1.46254 per dollar invested today. That is, if she invests $1,000 and the intermedi-
ate coupons are reinvested at 7.9 percent, the ending wealth for her bond invest-
ment should be $1,000 (1.079)5, or $1,462.54.
Our investor can purchase bond A, with a 7.9 percent coupon and a five-year
maturity, or bond B, with a 7.9 percent coupon, a six-year maturity, and a duration
of five years. The top panel of Table 18.2 illustrates what happens if bond A is pur-
chased and market yields remain constant for our investor’s five-year investment
horizon. Because the intermediate cash flows are reinvested at exactly 7.9 percent
each year, the ending amounts cumulate to $1,462.54. Notice in these examples that
we separate year 5 because of the return of principal ($1,000) at the end of year 5;
obviously, no interest is earned on the return of this $1,000. In a similar manner, at
the end of year 1, no interest has been earned on the first year’s $79 coupon, which
occurs at the end of the year.
Now consider what happens if our investor buys bond A and in the third year of
its five-year life, market yields decline to 6 percent and remain there for the remain-
der of the five-year period. As a result, the cash flows in the last three years of the
bond’s life are reinvested at 6 percent rather than at 7.9 percent. Therefore, the
reinvestment rate risk has a negative impact on the bond investment.
The results of a drop in the reinvestment rate are shown in the middle panel
of Table 18.2. At the end of year 5, the wealth for bond A now is only $1,447.13,
representing a shortfall for the investor’s wealth objective. This result occurred
because she did not immunize her portfolio against interest rate risk, but instead
EXHIBIT 18.1 | Understanding the Concept
of Immunization
Immunization
Seeks to
Protect a Portfolio Against Interest Rate Risk
by
Playing the Two Components of Interest Rate Risk
Against Each Other
The Objective is to Earn a Prespecified
Return
With an Immunized Portfolio:
If Interest Rates Go UP ⇑
Reinvestment Rates ↑
While
The Prices of Bonds ↓
If Interest Rates Go DOWN ⇓
Reinvestment Rates ↓
While
The Prices of Bonds ↑
The Key to Immunization is Duration
Ending Wealth for a Bond Following a Change in Market Yields with and without
Immunization
Bond A: Purchased for $1,000, Five-Year Maturity, 7.9 Percent Coupon, 7.9 Percent Yield to Maturity
Bond B: Purchased for $1,000, Six-Year Maturity, 7.9 Percent Coupon, 7.9 Percent Yield to Maturity, Duration = 5.00 Years
Part A: Ending Wealth for Bond A if Market Yields Remain Constant at 7.9 Percent
Years Cash Flow Reinvestment Rate (%) Ending Wealth
1 $79 — a $79.00
2 79 7.9 164.24
3 79 7.9 256.22
4 79 7.9 355.46
5 79 7.9 462.54
5 1,000 — 1,462.54
Part B: Ending Wealth for Bond A if Market Yields Decline to 6 Percent in Year 3
Years Cash Flow Reinvestment Rate (%) Ending Wealth
1 $79 — $79.00
2 79 7.9 164.24
3 79 6.0 253.10
4 79 6.0 347.29
5 79 6.0 477.13
5 1,000 — 1,447.13
Part C: Ending Wealth for Bond B if Market Yields Decline to 6 Percent in Year 3 (Bond B has a duration
of five years.)
Years Cash Flow Reinvestment Rate (%) Ending Wealth
1 $79 — $79.00
2 79 7.9 164.24
3 79 6.0 253.10
4 79 6.0 347.29
5 79 6.0 477.13
5 1,017.92 b — 1,465.05
a Cash flows are received at the end of the year.
b The price of bond B with one year left to maturity and a market yield of 6 percent is $1,017.92
Immunization 493
purchased a bond based on matching bond maturity with her investment horizon.
As explained previously, to protect against interest rate risk, it is necessary to pur-
chase a bond whose duration is equal to the investment horizon.
Assume that a $1,000 bond with a coupon rate of 7.9 percent and a six-year matu-
rity was purchased instead. The duration of this bond, which we call bond B, is
exactly five years, matching the investor’s investment horizon. In this case, the bond
is immunized against interest rate risk because any shortfall arising from a declin-
ing reinvestment rate is offset by a higher bond price at the end of the investment
horizon because the drop in interest rates produces an increase in the bond’s price.
Note that at the end of five years, bond B has one year left to maturity and could be
sold for $1,017.92 (see Part C of Table 18.2).
Ending Wealth for a Bond Following a Change in Market Yields with and without
Immunization
Bond A: Purchased for $1,000, Five-Year Maturity, 7.9 Percent Coupon, 7.9 Percent Yield to Maturity
Bond B: Purchased for $1,000, Six-Year Maturity, 7.9 Percent Coupon, 7.9 Percent Yield to Maturity, Duration = 5.00 Years
Part A: Ending Wealth for Bond A if Market Yields Remain Constant at 7.9 Percent
Years Cash Flow Reinvestment Rate (%) Ending Wealth
1 $79 — a $79.00
2 79 7.9 164.24
3 79 7.9 256.22
4 79 7.9 355.46
5 79 7.9 462.54
5 1,000 — 1,462.54
Part B: Ending Wealth for Bond A if Market Yields Decline to 6 Percent in Year 3
Years Cash Flow Reinvestment Rate (%) Ending Wealth
1 $79 — $79.00
2 79 7.9 164.24
3 79 6.0 253.10
4 79 6.0 347.29
5 79 6.0 477.13
5 1,000 — 1,447.13
Part C: Ending Wealth for Bond B if Market Yields Decline to 6 Percent in Year 3 (Bond B has a duration
of five years.)
Years Cash Flow Reinvestment Rate (%) Ending Wealth
1 $79 — $79.00
2 79 7.9 164.24
3 79 6.0 253.10
4 79 6.0 347.29
5 79 6.0 477.13
5 1,017.92 b — 1,465.05
a Cash flows are received at the end of the year.
b The price of bond B with one year left to maturity and a market yield of 6 percent is $1,017.92.
TABLE 18.2
494 Chapter 18 Bonds: Analysis and Strategy
Notice that the ending wealth values in Parts B and C are the same for the
first four years. At the end of year 5, bond B still has one year to maturity. Its
price has risen to $1,017.92 because of the drop in interest rates. The ending
wealth is more than enough to meet the investor’s objective of $1,462.54 per
$1,000 invested.
• By choosing a bond portfolio with a duration equal to a predetermined
investment horizon, it is possible, to immunize a portfolio against interest
rate risk.
Immunization is only one of the structured portfolio strategies. These strate-
gies occupy a position between passive strategies and active strategies. Although
the classical immunization discussed here could possibly be thought of as a pas-
sive strategy, we must be aware of the real-world problems involved in imple-
menting such a strategy. In truth, this strategy is not easy to implement, and it
is not a passive strategy in application. To achieve immunization as discussed
here requires frequent rebalancing because duration should always be equal to
the investment horizon. An investor simply cannot set duration equal to invest-
ment horizon at the beginning of the process and ignore the bond, or portfolio,
thereafter. 22
Summary
• A wide range of investors are interested in bonds, ranging from those who
seek a steady stream of interest income and return of principal to those seek-
ing capital gains by speculating on future interest rate movements.
• Passive bond strategies, whereby the investor does not actively trade in an
attempt to outperform the market, include buy and hold and indexing.
• Active bond management strategies rely on forecasted changes in interest
rates, yield spread analysis, and identifying relative mispricings.
• Duration is the weighted average time to recovery of all interest payments plus
principal repayment.
• Duration expands with time to maturity but at a decreasing rate, and it is
inversely related to coupon rate and yield to maturity.
• Modified duration indicates the approximate percentage price change for a
given change in a bond’s YTM.
• Convexity refers to the degree to which duration changes as the YTM changes.
The degree of convexity is not the same for all bonds.
• Immunization is the strategy of protecting (immunizing) a portfolio against
interest rate risk by attempting to have the two components of interest rate
risk—reinvestment rate risk and price risk—cancel each other out.
22 There are several variations of the basic immunization strategy. The most popular variation is called
horizon matching, or combination matching. This involves a portfolio that is duration matched and also
cash matched in the first few years. An alternative variation is contingent immunization, which involves
active management plus a lower floor return that is ensured for the horizon period. The portfolio man-
ager must act to earn the floor return by immunizing the portfolio if necessary. Otherwise, the manager
can actively manage the portfolio or some portion thereof.
Questions 495
Questions
18.1 Describe two different types of investors interested
in bonds as an investment.
18.2 List two of the most important reasons for U.S.
investors to purchase foreign bonds.
18.3 Assume a U.S. investor buys French bonds. If the
euro weakens, how does that affect the U.S. inves-
tor’s dollar-denominated return?
18.4 A U.S. investor buying foreign bonds is selling
the dollar. Agree or disagree and explain your
reasoning.
18.5 When would bond yields be expected to move in
the same direction as nominal GDP?
18.6 When would an expected increase in inflation neg-
atively impact bond investors?
18.7 Why would an increase in the Fed’s federal funds
rate target be expected to lead to an increase in the
long-term bond rate?
18.8 What is the key factor in analyzing bonds? Why?
18.9 Why are yield spreads important to an investor?
18.10 Identify and explain at least two passive bond
management strategies.
18.11 Identify and explain two specific active bond
management strategies. Are the two related?
18.12 How does duration differ from time to maturity?
What does duration tell you?
18.13 How is duration related to time to maturity? To
coupon? The YTM? Do the same relationships hold
for a zero-coupon bond?
18.14 Assume that an investor wishes to maximize the
potential price volatility from a bond portfolio.
What should this investor seek in the way of coupon,
maturity, and duration?
18.15 Is duration a complete measure of bond risk? Is it
the best measure?
18.16 Explain the concept of immunization. What role, if
any, does duration play in this concept?
18.17 Assume you expect interest rates to decline sharply,
and you can invest only in fixed-income securities.
Further assume your time horizon is one year; how
would you construct a portfolio?
18.18 When would investors find long-term bonds, selling
at large discounts, particularly unattractive?
18.19 What is meant by the term “bond mispricings”?
18.20 How can horizon analysis be used to manage a bond
portfolio?
18.21 Assume some Canadian government bonds are cur-
rently yielding 2 percent more than comparable
Treasury securities. Suppose you project that the
Canadian economy will slow. How would this impact
your decision to purchase the Canadian bonds?
How would you decide whether to hedge this posi-
tion?
CFA
18.22 Sam Stevens, the trustee for the Hole Punchers
Labor Union (HPLU), has approached IM Asso-
ciates (IMA) to manage its $200 million bond
portfolio. IMA assigned Carol Peters to the HPLU
account. In their first meeting, Mr. Stevens told Ms.
Peters: “We are an extremely conservative pension
fund. We believe in investing only in investment
grade bonds so that there is minimal risk that the
principal will be lost. We want at least 40 percent
of the portfolio in bonds that will mature within
the next three years. I would like your thoughts on
this proposed structure.” How should Ms. Peters
respond?
CFA
18.23 A British portfolio manager is considering invest-
ing in Japanese government bonds denominated in
yen. What are the major risks associated with this
investment?
CFA
18.24 A portfolio manager wants to estimate the interest
rate risk of a bond. The bond’s current price is 82. A
valuation model found that if interest rates decline
by 30 basis points, the price will increase to 83.50; if
interest rates increase by 30 basis points, the price
will decline to 80.75. What is the effective duration
of this bond?
CFA
18.25 A portfolio manager purchased an $8 million bond
portfolio with an average modified of 5. Determine
• A portfolio is immunized (the effects of interest rate risk are neutralized) if
the portfolio’s duration is equal to a preselected investment horizon.
• Immunization is only one of the structured portfolio strategies, which occupy
a position between passive strategies and active strategies.