CHAPTER 4
As you prepare to invest your
inheritance, you wonder if you
should know more about the New
York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq.
Should you care where the stocks
you buy and sell trade? Having
heard of the bubble in the Nasdaq
market that burst in 2000, you also
wonder if you should even con-
sider Nasdaq stocks. And some-
one has mentioned that electronic
communications networks (ECNs)
may be the future of investing,
but you are unfamiliar with these
trading systems. Even more basic,
despite listening to the news each
night and hearing how the Dow
Jones Index and Nasdaq Index
closed for the day, you clearly real-
ize that this doesn’t tell you much.
Does a 75-point gain in the Dow in one day constitute a great day, or could it be
less significant in today’s world than in the past? Even more confusing, “in 2014,
the stock market was up 7.5 percent, but it was also up 13.7 percent”—how is this
possible? Finally, what about bonds—where do they trade, and how will you handle
their purchase and sale?
Chapter 4 outlines the structure of the markets where investors buy and sell
securities. Although primary markets are considered, the emphasis is on secondary
markets where most investors are active. We focus on equity markets because most
investors are primarily interested in stocks; but we also outline bond and derivative
markets. Market indexes are analyzed in some detail because of their universal eve-
ryday use by investors.
The structure and operating mechanisms of the securities markets in the United
States have changed drastically in the last 10 years and more changes can be
expected going forward.
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Distinguish between primary and
secondary markets.
• Outline where the three major
types of securities discussed in
Chapter 2—bonds, equities, and
derivatives—are traded.
• Understand how the equity markets
are organized, how they operate,
and how they differ from each
other.
• Recognize and understand the var-
ious stock market indexes typically
encountered by investors.
The Primary Markets 91
The Importance of Financial Markets
In order to finance and expand their operations, business firms must invest
capital in amounts that are beyond their capacity to generate funds. Similarly,
governments must borrow large amounts of money to provide the goods and ser-
vices that people demand of them. The financial markets permit both business
and government to raise the needed funds by selling securities. Simultaneously,
investors with excess funds are able to invest and earn a return, thus enhancing
their welfare.
Financial markets are absolutely vital for the proper functioning of capitalistic
economies, since they serve to channel funds from savers to borrowers. Further-
more, they provide an important allocative function by channeling the funds to
those who can make the best use of them—presumably, the most productive. In fact,
the chief function of a capital market is to allocate resources optimally.1
The existence of well-functioning secondary markets, where investors come
together to trade existing securities, assures the purchasers of new securities that
they can quickly sell their securities if the need arises. Of course, such sales may
involve a loss because there are no guarantees in the financial markets. A loss, how-
ever, may be much preferred to having no cash at all if the securities cannot be
readily sold.
In summary, secondary markets are indispensable to the proper functioning of
the primary markets, where new securities are sold. The primary markets, in turn,
are indispensable to the proper functioning of the economy.
The Primary Markets
A primary market is where an issuer issues securities in exchange for cash from
an investor (buyer). New sales of Treasury bonds, or Apple stock, or California
bonds all take place in the primary markets. The issuers of these securities—the
U.S. government, Apple, and the state of California, respectively—receive cash
from the buyers of these new securities, who in turn receive new financial claims
on the issuer.
The issuance of common stock by a publicly traded company is called a seasoned
issue. On the other hand, if the issuer is selling securities for the first time, it is
referred to as an Initial Public Offering (IPO). When the original purchasers sub-
sequently sell the securities, they trade in secondary markets. Securities may trade
repeatedly in the secondary market, but the original issuers will be unaffected in the
sense that they receive no additional cash from these transactions.
Primary markets (for publicly traded securities) can be illustrated as:
Sale of new securities
Seasoned new issues
and
IPOs
Using Investment bankers
Who form
syndicates
to sell the securities
Primary Market The
market for new issues of
securities, typically offered
through investment
bankers
Initial Public Offering
(IPO) Common stock of
a company being sold for
the first time
1 A securities market with this characteristic is said to be allocationally efficient. An operationally efficient mar-
ket, on the other hand, is one with the lowest possible prices for transactions services.
92 Chapter 4 Securities Markets and Market Indexes
Initial Public Offerings (IPOs)
The year 2007 set a record for global equity issuance with 1,967 deals valued at $338
billion. However, for 2009, in the aftermath of the financial crisis, the number of
deals had dropped to 566 valued at only $120 billion. Following the financial crisis,
the global IPO market has continued to recover with IPOs in 2017 numbering 1,624
valued at $188.8 billion.
The United States is generally a leader in IPOs, having essentially pioneered and
developed the concept. Other countries, however, have made substantial gains in
recent years. For example, in 2017, there were 174 IPOs in the United States, rais-
ing $39.5 billion; these deals accounted for 21 percent of global deal value. In com-
parison, in 2017, there were 935 IPOs on Asia-Pacific exchanges with a value of
$73.2 billion.
When the IPO market is very active, and investors are clamoring for shares
of new companies, the prices of these stocks often soar on the first day of trad-
ing. Those investors lucky enough to receive an initial allocation of these stocks
at the offer price can see the value of their shares increase dramatically in a
short time. However, the average investor typically cannot receive an initial allo-
cation of “hot” stocks because the investment bankers reward favored clients
with shares.
What if you wish to know more about a company that is planning to go public—
Uber in 2019, for example? A company must file a registration statement with the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) before it goes public. This statement,
called an S-1, often contains useful information about the company. In particular,
investors may spot warning signals or troublesome issues that will affect the com-
pany’s performance.
IPOs tend to run in cycles of investor interest. For example, the IPO market was
very active in the late 1990s because of the dot.com craze and technology boom. In
the severe market downturn of 2000–2002, however, investors had little interest in
assuming the risk of new issues. In 2008, during the financial crisis, only 21 operat-
ing companies in the United States went public; however, the market again became
more active as the economy subsequently recovered.
The strong U.S. economic growth that began in 2017 created an environment
conducive for IPOs. The favorable economic environment led to the announce-
ment of several mega-deal IPOs in 2018 and 2019. These deals include well-known
firms such as Spotify, Dropbox, Uber, Lyft, Airbnb, and Pinterest.
Research on IPOs identifies two major conclusions.
First, IPO stocks generally skyrocket on their first day of
trading, which suggests that they are underpriced at initial offering. Second,
on average, the long-run performance of IPO stocks is not particularly
attractive. Dr. Jay Ritter at the University of Florida, an authority on IPOs,
finds that the average three-year returns of IPO stocks lags that of similar
non-IPO stocks by a significant margin. He attributes this result to fads and
irrational optimism on the part of investors. Thus, if you are lucky enough
to obtain an initial allocation of an IPO you are likely to do well, but you
probably shouldn’t make it a habit to purchase recent IPO stocks in the
secondary market.
EXAMPLE 4.1
The Primary Markets 93
The Investment Banker
In the course of selling new securities, issuers often rely on an investment banker
for the necessary expertise as well as the ability to reach widely dispersed suppliers
of capital. Along with performing activities such as helping corporations in merg-
ers and acquisitions, investment banking firms specialize in the design and sale of
securities in the primary market while operating simultaneously in the secondary
markets. For example, Citigroup offers investment banking services while operating
a large global retail brokerage operation. Other investment banking names include
JP Morgan, Goldman Sachs, and Morgan Stanley.
Investment bankers act as intermediaries between issuers and investors. Typically,
the issuer sells its securities to investment bankers, who in turn sell the securities to
investors. For firms seeking to raise long-term funds, the investment banker can pro-
vide important advice to their clients during the planning stage preceding the issu-
ance of new securities. This advice includes providing information about the type
of security to be sold, the security’s features, the price, and the timing of the sale.
Selling the new issue Investment bankers underwrite new issues by purchasing
the securities and assuming the risk of reselling them to investors. Investment bank-
ers provide a valuable service to the issuers at this stage. The issuer receives its funds
and can spend the proceeds for the purposes for which the funds are being raised.
The investment bankers own the securities until they are resold. Investment bankers
are compensated for their efforts by a spread, which is the difference between what
they pay the issuer for the securities and what they sell them for to the public (i.e.,
the securities are purchased from the issuer at a discount).
Investment Banking Syndicates Investment bankers protect themselves by
forming a syndicate, which consists of a group of investment banks. This allows them
to diversify their risk. One or more investment bankers oversee the underwriting
syndicate, which becomes part of a larger group that sells the securities.
Investment Banker Firm
specializing in the sale
of new securities to
the public, typically by
underwriting the issue
Underwrite The process
by which investment bank-
ers purchase an issue of
securities from a firm and
resell it to the public
Concepts in Action
LinkedIn, a Successful IPO, and the Wealth
It Generated
In May 2011, LinkedIn, the professional social
networking company, went public, selling almost
8 million shares. The underwriters were led by
JP Morgan, Bank of America, Merrill Lynch, and
Morgan Stanley. Shortly before it went public, the
company suggested a valuation for the IPO of
about $3 billion. The IPO price was set at $45. On
the day of the IPO, the stock opened at $83, about
84 percent higher than the IPO price. At one point
during that first day, the stock price was up about
170 percent, and the stock closed at $94.25.
The company did not expect to be profitable
in 2011. Nevertheless, the demand for shares
was so large that numerous institutional investors
were unable to buy shares at the IPO price. Some
feared that such a high valuation for an Internet
company could be a sign of a bubble for web
valuations.
An interesting issue is the sale of shares
by LinkedIn employees. Typically, with an IPO,
employees have a six-month lockup period,
meaning they can’t sell their shares for six
months after the company goes public. Linke-
dIn’s lockup period ended on November 19,
2011, and 50 million shares became saleable.
Prior to November 19, merchants and sellers
of a wide range of expensive products
were gearing up for the event, with the
expectation of making sales to these newly
minted millionaires.
96 Chapter 4 Securities Markets and Market Indexes
Currently, equities trade in the United States on two well-known major exchanges:
The New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq Stock Market (Nasdaq). 7 In addition,
there is a newer national exchange known as BATS, as well as electronic communi-
cation networks (ECNs), a relatively recent innovation for the trading of securities.
Competition between markets benefits investors and the economy as a whole.
Each major exchange trades listed securities. Companies that issue stock for pub-
lic trading must choose where their shares will be listed for trading and then apply for
listing. They must also meet the listing requirements of the respective marketplace
and agree to abide by the investor protection rules of that market. Additionally, each
listing company must pay a listing fee to the market where its securities are traded.
What about companies not listed on any market? In most cases, these companies
fail to qualify for trading on an exchange or market, but in some cases, they simply
choose not to apply. These securities are considered to be over-the-counter (OTC)
securities, a term which refers to an equity security not listed or traded on a national
securities exchange or market.
Exhibit 4.2 shows where both listed and unlisted stocks are traded in the second-
ary markets. The NYSE involves a physical location in New York, while the Nasdaq
is an electronic market of dealers who make a market in each of the Nasdaq stocks.
In either case, investors are typically represented by brokers, intermediaries who
represent both buyers and sellers and attempt to obtain the best price possible for
either party in a transaction.
• Brokers collect commissions for their efforts and generally have no vested
interest in whether a customer places a buy order or a sell order for the appli-
cable asset.
The New York Stock Exchange
Tracing its history back to 1792, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) is the oldest
and most prominent secondary market in the United States and the world’s largest
Listed Securities The
securities of companies
meeting specified require-
ments of exchanges and
marketplaces
Broker An intermediary
who represents buyers
and sellers in securities
transactions and receives a
commission
New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) The major
secondary market for the
trading of U.S. equity
securities
EXHIBIT 4.1 | Structure of the Secondary Markets
Type of Securities Where traded
Equity securities Three major stock exchanges
NYSE (including NYSE MKT)
Nasdaq stock market
BATS
Electronic Communications Networks (ECNs)
Unlisted equities Over the counter
Bonds Mostly over the counter
NYSE and Amex bond markets (very small amounts of corporates)
Puts and calls Various options exchanges
Futures contracts Various futures exchanges
7 In 2014, the NASDAQ OMX Group became known as Nasdaq.
98 Chapter 4 Securities Markets and Market Indexes
an ATS, consisting of an anonymous electronic market open to all market partici-
pants, for U.S. equity block trading.
Program trading is defined by the NYSE as the purchase or sale of a basket of at
least 15 stocks valued at $1 million or more. It is used to accomplish certain trad-
ing strategies, such as portfolio accumulation and liquidation and arbitrage against
derivative contracts. Program trading volume often accounts for approximately
30 percent of total NYSE volume.
For 2017, the NYSE share of U.S. stock trading fell to approximately 22 percent,
a record low. This reflected a shift of more trading to private electronic markets.
The Nasdaq Stock Market
The Nasdaq Stock Market has called itself “the largest electronic screen-based
equity securities market in the United States.” This electronic trading system
provides instantaneous transactions as its market makers compete for investor
orders. Nasdaq is the primary market for trading Nasdaq-listed stocks. In addi-
tion, it claims that it routes more share volume to the floor of the NYSE than any
other member.
Orders on Nasdaq come from market makers (dealers) who make markets in
Nasdaq stocks, ECNs, and online brokers such as TD Ameritrade. These partici-
pants compete freely with each other through an electronic network of termi-
nals. Dealers conduct transactions directly with each other and with customers.
In effect, Nasdaq links together all of the liquidity providers for a particular
stock, allowing them to efficiently compete with each other. The Nasdaq market
gathers the quotes and orders from these participants and consolidates them into
one tape.
The sharp market decline of 2000–2002 dramatically affected this market. The
Nasdaq index went from an all-time high of 5,048 in March 2000 to 1,200 in 2002,
and trading in technology stocks, a prominent feature of Nasdaq, plunged sharply.
For example, many telecommunications companies, such as Global Crossing and
WorldCom, were completely devastated, and many technology/Internet companies
went bankrupt.
Nasdaq is well known as the home of numerous prominent technology com-
panies. For example, Nasdaq’s Global Market includes Apple (AAPL), Alphabet
(GOOG), Adobe Systems (ADBE), and Intel (INTL). Note that each of these stock
symbols (in parentheses) consists of four letters, which is common for Nasdaq-listed
stocks.
Nasdaq claims to be the world’s largest exchange company. Like the NYSE, it is
publicly traded. Its trading and technology reach across six continents. As of 2017,
Nasdaq listed more than 3,700 companies in 35 countries, representing more than
$10 trillion in market value.
NYSE Versus Nasdaq
The NYSE and Nasdaq have carried on a running battle for stock listings. Each of
the two tries to attract companies being listed for the first time while also attempt-
ing to lure the other’s established listings away. The NYSE argues that its well-known
brand and global reach are very important to companies. Nasdaq points to its elec-
tronic trading. Both markets are now offering a variety of services to companies in
an attempt to persuade companies to list with them.
Program Trading Involves
the use of computer-
generated orders to buy
and sell securities
Nasdaq Stock Market
(Nasdaq) An electronic
marketplace providing
instantaneous transactions
as its market makers com-
pete for investor orders
Market Makers (Dealers)
An individual (firm) who
makes a market in a stock
by buying from and selling
to investors
The Secondary Markets 99
The OTC (Over-the-counter) Market
The OTC market is not an organized marketplace or exchange. Instead, it offers a
forum for equity securities not listed on a U.S. exchange. OTC securities are issued
by companies that either are unable to meet the standards for listing or that choose
not to be listed on an exchange. Many OTC issuers are small companies that face
financial difficulties or have a limited operating record. Thus, they represent high-
risk investments.
OTC equity securities can be quoted on the Pink Sheets Electronic Quotation Service,
and/or if the securities are registered with the SEC and their issuers are current in
their reporting obligation, on the OTC Bulletin Board.
BATS
Most investors are not familiar with the newest security exchange known as the Bet-
ter Alternative Trading System (BATS). Launched in 2005 as an ECN, BATS was
designed as an alternative to the NYSE and Nasdaq. In 2008, BATS converted its
ECN to a national securities exchange, which expanded the products and services
it could offer. It is now the third largest securities exchange in the world (the NYSE
and Nasdaq are the two largest). BATS accounts for about 11 percent of daily trad-
ing in U.S.-listed shares. BATS appeals to hedge funds and others who trade often
and for whom speed of trading is critically important.
BATS operates two stock exchanges in the United States as well as a U.S. equities
options market and BATS Europe. In mid-2011, BATS applied to the SEC to be able
to list securities on one of its U.S. exchanges. In early 2012, it reached an agreement
to list eight new ETFs, its first primary listings.
Electronic Communication Networks (ECNs)
The traditional ways of trading equity securities—exchange auction markets and the
fully computerized Nasdaq market—have been significantly changed by advances in
electronic trading.
An Electronic Communication Network (ECN) is a computerized trading
network that matches buy and sell orders that come from their own subscrib-
ers as well as customer orders routed from other brokerage firms. Each order
received is displayed by the ECN in its computer system. Paying subscribers
can see the entire order book, and ECNs display their best bid and ask quotes
in the Nasdaq quotation system for all market participants to see. An investor
wishing to transact at one of the prices displayed on the computer system elec-
tronically submits an order to the ECN. ECNs offer automation, lower costs,
and anonymity as to who is doing the buying or selling. There are no spreads or
Electronic Communication
Network (ECN) A com-
puterized trading network
for buying and selling
securities electronically
In November 2011, Viacom announced it was moving
from the NYSE, after 40 years, to Nasdaq. The opposite
also occurs. In 2010, Charles Schwab, the large discount broker, moved from
Nasdaq to the NYSE. Visibility plays a major role in such decisions today. When
Groupon went public in late 2011, it selected Nasdaq because of a promise to
promote its visibility and what it offers.
Stock Market Indexes 107
Foreign Stock Market Indicators
Stock market indexes are available for most foreign markets, but the composition,
weighting, and computational procedures vary widely from index to index. This
makes it difficult to make comparisons. To deal with these problems, some organiza-
tions have constructed their own set of indexes on a consistent basis.
A well-known index of foreign stocks, and also the oldest international index, is
the MSCI EAFE Index, or the Europe, Australasia, and Far East Index. The EAFE,
compiled by Morgan Stanley Capital International, is a capitalization-weighted,
non-American, developed market index. It is often used to measure the perfor-
mance of the major international equity markets. 15 A limitation of this index is
that it does not include rapidly growing emerging markets (EMs) such as Brazil,
China, and India.
MSCI EAFE Index The
Europe, Australasia, and
Far East Index, a value-
weighted index of the
equity performance of
major foreign markets
Jan 08
Dow Jones industrial average
Yahoo!
Mar 02, 2012
Jan 09 Jan 10 Jan 11 Jan 12 – 60%
10.0
15.0
5.0
0.0
– 40%
– 20%
+ 20%
+ 40%
0%
c
DOW S&P500 NASDAQ
Volume
Billions
FIGURE 4.2 A comparison of the Dow Jones industrial average, the S&P 500 index, and the Nasdaq
index, early 2007–early 2012
Source: Reproduced with the Permission of YAHOO! Inc. Copyright © 2012 by YAHOO! Inc. YAHOO! and the
YAHOO! Logo are Trademarks of YAHOO! Inc.
15 A number of index funds are designed to mirror the performance of the EAFE index. For example, the
iShares EAFE Fund (EFA) is the fourth-largest ETF in the world.
Investments Intuition
When Indexes Diverge
If investors use both the DJIA and the S&P 500
Index to measure market performance, the two
indexes should produce similar results most of
the time. However, significant differences can
occur. In 2014, for example, the DJIA gained
7.52 percent for the year, while the S&P 500
returned 13.69 percent. Therefore, you could
give two different answers for the market
change for large stocks for 2014, and both
answers would be correct. Nevertheless, unless
you were holding only the 30 stocks in the Dow,
the 7.52 percent gain would be misleading to
you as an investor.
108 Chapter 4 Securities Markets and Market Indexes
The Dow Jones World Stock Index covers the Pacific Region, Europe, Canada,
Mexico, and the United States. It is designed to be a comprehensive measure and
represents approximately 80 percent of the world’s stock markets. Unlike the DJIA,
the World Stock Index is capitalization weighted. The Wall Street Journal calculates
and reports the DJ World Stock Index as part of its “International Stock Indexes”
carried daily in the Journal. Stock market indexes for all of the major foreign mar-
kets are also shown in this section.
The Global DowSM Index is designed to reflect the global stock market as it actu-
ally exists in terms of industries and regions. It consists of 150 stocks representing
leading companies from around the world, whether in a developed or emerging
economy.
Other foreign indexes include the STOXX ® Europe 600 Index, created in 1986,
which covers small, midcap, and large capitalization companies in 18 European
countries. The S&P Asia 50 covers stocks in Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and
Taiwan, while the Nikkei 225 is comprised of the largest Japanese stocks. MSCI also
offers several EM stock indexes, including a comprehensive EM index and an EM
Beyond BRIC index that excludes Brazil, Russia, India, and China. The BRIC coun-
tries dominate the performance of most EM stock indexes.
Checking Your Understanding
6. What is the major presumed deficiency of the DJIA?
7. Is the S&P 500 Index affected by the size of the companies in the index?
Bond Markets
Just as stockholders need good secondary markets for trading stocks and preserving
their flexibility, bondholders need a viable market for bond trading. Otherwise, many
investors would be reluctant to tie up their funds for many years until a long-term bond
matured. At the very least, they would demand higher initial yields on bonds, which
would hinder fund raising efforts by those firms and institutions wishing to borrow.
Investors can purchase either new bonds issued in the primary market or existing
bonds outstanding in the secondary market. Yields for the two must be in equilibrium.
The Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) has the largest centralized bond market
of any exchange, which is called NYSE Bonds. The trading platform incorporates
an all-electronic trading platform and includes corporates, agencies, and Treasury
bonds. The majority of the volume is in corporate debt.
Individual Investors and Bond Trading
Traditionally, the bond market has not been friendly to individual investors. Currently,
individual investors can buy bonds directly only from the Federal government.16 Mov-
ing beyond Treasuries, investors generally must use a broker to buy bonds.
Most bonds trade over the counter, which means there is no centralized mar-
ketplace or exchange. The bond market is actually a dealer to dealer market, with
Dow Jones World Stock
Index A capitalization-
weighted index designed
to be a comprehensive
measure of worldwide
stock performance
Global DowSM Index
A stock market index
designed to reflect the
global stock market as it
actually exists in terms of
industries and regions
16 As noted in Chapter 2, TreasuryDirect allows investors to maintain accounts directly with the U.S. Treas-
ury online, buying bills, notes, and bonds at auction without paying a commission.