389CHAPTER 15
The last step in performing funda-
mental security analysis is to evalu-
ate individual companies. From the
outset of your quest to gain investing
knowledge, owning individual stocks
was probably one of your top objec-
tives. Undoubtedly, you have heard
stories about individuals who owned
stocks that doubled, tripled, or did
even better. And when investors or
the media discuss tremendous stock
performance, they commonly attrib-
ute it to strong earnings reports.
Finally, it is important to understand
the nuances of earnings such as earn-
ings guidance, earnings surprises,
and earnings disappointments.
As we learned in Chapter 11, most investors following an active approach are
stock selectors. Everyone wants to hold stocks that will perform well over time, and
many investors are searching for the next Apple, Alphabet, or Amazon.
Once economy/market analysis has indicated projected future economic condi-
tions and sector/industry analysis has identified the business types that will prosper
during the projected economic conditions, it is time to apply the final step in a top-
down security analysis, the evaluation of individual firms. To be successful, investors
need to have a good understanding of the broad factors that affect security returns,
but they also need to be adept at evaluating individual firm financials.
Fundamental Analysis
Fundamental analysis involves analyzing basic financial variables in order to estimate
a company’s intrinsic value. These variables include sales, profit margins, deprecia-
tion, the tax rate, sources of financing, asset utilization, and other factors. Addi-
tional analysis could involve the firm’s competitive position in its industry, labor
relations, technological changes, management, foreign competition, and so on.
• An end result of fundamental analysis is a good understanding of a company’s
financial variables and its potential, culminating in a calculation of its intrinsic
value.
Company Analysis
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain the role of accounting data
in financial analysis.
• Use a company’s financial
statements for security analysis
purposes.
• Explain the impact of earnings
announcements and surprises
on stock prices.
• Discuss how price multiples fit into
security analysis
390 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
As discussed in Chapter 10, investors can use a discount model to estimate intrin-
sic value. Alternatively, they can use a multiplier model, based on a forecast of a
firm’s particular financial characteristic and an appropriate price multiple. The
most popular multiplier approach relies on estimated Earnings Per Share (EPS)
and projected P/E ratio.
We concentrate on earnings and P/E ratios because this is what investors com-
monly use and what most investment advisory services generally discuss when ana-
lyzing stocks.1 Despite the uproar about accounting scandals, EPS is still the major
variable of interest to investors. Furthermore, the close correlation between earn-
ings changes and stock-price changes is well documented. As Jeremy Siegel states
in his book, Stocks for the Long Run, “stock values are based on corporate earnings.” 2
• Future profitability is the most fundamental factor affecting stock price; there-
fore, EPS and stock price are closely related.
The Accounting Aspects of Earnings
If investors are to focus on a company’s EPS, they should understand the vari-
ous uses of the word “earnings,” how EPS is determined, and what it represents.
EPS is the bottom line—the item of major interest—in a company’s financial
statements. Investors must understand the components of EPS before they can
attempt to forecast it—and earnings forecasts remain a major building block of
stock valuation.
The Financial Statements
Investors rely heavily on financial statements when performing security analysis. To
illustrate the use of financial statements in doing company analysis, we examine the
financial statements for the Coca-Cola Company.
The balance sheet The balance sheet shows a corporation’s assets, as well as its
liabilities and owner’s equity, at a point in time. The value at which an item is carried
on the balance sheet is dictated by accounting conventions. Cash is the actual dollar
amount, whereas marketable securities could be at cost or market value. Stockhold-
ers’ equity and fixed assets are reported on a book value basis.
The balance sheet for Coca-Cola is shown in Exhibit 15.1. The asset side is divided
into Current Assets, Investments, Property, Plant and Equipment, Goodwill, and Intangible
Assets. There are a couple of unique aspects of Coca-Cola’s asset structure. First, over
half of Coca-Cola’s current assets are comprised of cash and short-term investments,
which represents a significant holding in liquid reserves. Second, the substantial val-
ues in Goodwill and Intangible Assets reflect the strong brand recognition and product
differentiation enjoyed by Coca-Cola.
The right-hand side of the balance sheet is divided between Current Liabilities
(payable within one year), Long-Term Debt, Deferred Liability Charges, Minority Interest,
Other Liabilities, and Shareholders’ Equity. Relative to most firms, Coke relies heavily
Financial Statements The
principal published finan-
cial data about a company,
primarily the balance
sheet, income statement,
and statement of cash
flows
Balance Sheet A summary
of a company’s assets,
liabilities, and owner’s
equity at a specific point
in time
1 Many investors use relative valuation techniques, comparing a company’s P/E, P/B, and/or P/S to
various benchmarks to assess the company’s relative value. Using these techniques, it is not necessary to
make a point estimate of intrinsic value. Instead, investors simply try to determine if a stock is reasonably
valued, overvalued, or undervalued without being too precise about the absolute amount.
2 See Jeremy Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run, 5th ed. (McGraw-Hill, 2012).
The Accounting Aspects of Earnings 391
EXHIBIT 15.1 | The Balance Sheet for Coca-Cola
(all values in $ millions)
Period Ending Dec 31, 2018 Dec 31, 2017
Assets
Current Assets
Cash and Short-Term Investments 15,964 20,675
Net Receivables 3,396 3,667
Inventory 2,766 2,655
Other Current Assets 8,508 9,548
Total Current Assets 30,634 36,545
Long-Term Investments 20,274 23,281
Property/Plant/Equipment 8,232 8,203
Goodwill 10,263 9,401
Intangible Assets 7,007 7,235
Other Assets 6,806 3,231
Total Assets 83,216 87,896
Liabilities
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable 2,498 2,288
Accrued Expenses 6,576 6,684
Notes Payable/Short-Term Debt 13,194 13,205
Current Port. of LT Debt/Capital Leases 4,997 3,298
Other Current Liabilities 1,958 1,719
Total Current Liabilities 29,223 27,194
Long-Term Debt 25,364 31,182
Deferred Long-Term Liability Charges 0 0
Minority Interest 2,077 1,905
Other Liabilities 9,571 10,543
Total Liabilities 66,235 70,824
Stockholders’ Equity
Preferred Stock 0 0
Common Stock 1,760 1,760
Additional Paid-In Capital (Capital Surplus) 16,520 15,864
Retained Earnings 63,234 60,430
Treasury Stock (51,719) (50,677)
Other Shareholder Equity (12,814) (10,305)
Total Shareholder Equity 16,981 17,072
Total Liabilities and Shareholder Equity 83,216 87,89
on short-term debt to finance its operations. For 2018, its short-term debt value is
similar to the value in long-term debt. The entry in Minority Interest represents the
portion of Coke’s subsidiary firms that is not owned by Coke.
In 2018, shareholders’ equity includes a substantial amount of retained earnings,
$63.2 billion. The retained earnings item does not represent “spendable” funds
for a company; rather, it designates that part of previous earnings reinvested in the
firm, instead of being paid out as dividends. Note the large balance in Treasury Stock,
which represents shares of Coca-Cola stock repurchased and held by the company
itself. This value reduces stockholders’ equity substantially and is unusually large
when compared to the value reported by most companies.
It is important for investors to carefully analyze a company’s balance sheet to
assess the firm’s financial condition. Investors evaluate a company’s asset and lia-
bility structure to help determine the company’s long-term prospects. For exam-
ple, in the latter years of the 1990s, numerous companies used large amounts of
debt to improve their performance. Following the severe stock market downturn
in 2000–2002, investors became much more concerned about both the amount of
debt shown on the balance sheet and the amount of cash available to survive dif-
ficult periods. These issues again became critical during the financial crisis of 2008.
The income statement This statement is used to assess firm performance and
as a guide to the company’s future profitability. The income statement represents
a company’s financial flows for a particular period. Exhibit 15.2 shows Coca-Cola’s
income statement for 2017 and 2018.
A key item for investors on the income statement is after-tax net income (Con-
solidated Net Income), which, when divided by the number of common shares out-
standing, produces EPS. Earnings from continuing operations (Net Income from
Continuing Ops) typically are used to judge the company’s success and are almost
always the earnings reported in the financial press. Nonrecurring earnings, such
as extraordinary items that arise from unusual and infrequently occurring transac-
tions, are separated from income from continuing operations.
Exhibit 15.2 clearly illustrates the “flow” in an income statement. Starting with
Total Revenue (net sales), Cost of Goods Sold is deducted to obtain Gross Profit. Subtrac-
tion of Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses results in Operating Income, which
for Coca-Cola in 2018 was $9.152 billion. Operating income is then adjusted by add-
ing/subtracting other income/expenses and subtracting interest expense. For most
firms, interest expense is a large item because firms like to take advantage of the tax
deductibility of interest by assuming significant amounts of debt. For Coke, interest
expense in 2018 is only $950 million, which reflects Coke’s relatively low reliance on
debt, particularly long-term debt.
After deducting interest expense from Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (EBIT),
the result is Earnings Before Tax. Subtracting out income taxes results in Consolidated
Net Income. After a small adjustment for the income attributable to the minority own-
ers of Coke’s subsidiaries, we arrive at Net Income from Continuing Operations, which
is adjusted for extraordinary items to yield Net Income. In this case, Coke has a small
adjustment for extraordinary items in each year. In 2017, the value increases net
income, whereas the amount in 2018 is negative.
Dividing net income by the average shares outstanding produces EPS for 2018
of $1.58. Dividends paid to shareholders are subtracted from net income and the
remainder becomes retained earnings. Dividends per share were $1.56; therefore,
Coke’s dividend payout ratio was 99 percent in 2018.
Charges to earnings that result from nonrecurring events, discontinued opera-
tions, extraordinary items, and accounting changes are considered at the bottom of
Income Statement An
accounting of a company’s
income and expenses over
a specified period of time
The Accounting Aspects of Earnings 393
the income statement. Since these charges are considered unusual, they are com-
monly omitted when investors seek to establish a firm’s “core earnings,” which are
considered most relevant for forecasting the firm’s future earnings potential. For
some firms, these unusual charges can be quite large.
The cash flow statement The third financial statement is the cash flow state-
ment, which incorporates elements of both the balance sheet and income statement
as well as other items. It is designed to track the flow of cash through the firm. It
consists of three parts:
• Cash from operating activities
• Cash from investing activities
• Cash from financing activities
The cash flow statement helps investors assess the quality of a firm’s earnings.
For example, if inventories are rising more quickly than sales, this can be a sign
of trouble—demand may be softening. If a company is cutting back on its capital
expenditures, this may indicate that firm growth will slow in the future. If accounts
receivable are rising at a rate greater than sales are increasing, a company may
be having trouble collecting on its receivables. If accounts payable are rising too
quickly, a company may be conserving cash by delaying payments to suppliers, a
potential sign of trouble for the company.
394 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
Earnings that are not accompanied by increases in cash flows are referred to as
accruals. Investors should be wary of companies with high or increasing accruals.
High-quality earnings will flow through to the statement of cash flows, so investors
should take note if a firm is reporting strong earnings results but weak cash flows.
Exhibit 15.3 shows the Statement of Cash Flows for Coca-Cola. In 2018, Coke
generated a very healthy cash flow from operating activities of $7.63 billion; about
84 percent of the cash came from net income. During the year, the firm made
substantial investments to expand its future profitability by investing $1.10 billion
in fixed assets (capital expenditures). The financing activities segment shows that
Coke returned a substantial amount of cash to its equity holders by paying $6.64
billion in dividends and repurchasing $436 million of common stock. Furthermore,
Coke reduced its debt balance by $3.23 billion during the year. Overall, for 2018,
Coke increased its cash holdings by about $2.95 billion during the year.
For 2018, Coca-Cola reduced its debt balance substantially, paid its dividend, and
financed its capital expenditure with cash from operating activities and by drawing
down its investment holdings by a large amount ($8.08 billion). In addition, the
firm was left with a significant addition to its holdings of cash and cash equivalents.
Because of the flexibility allowed in accounting rules, firms will occasion-
ally engage in “earnings management” in order to improve reported financial
Motorola’s financial statements showed that net cash used
for inventories went from $678 million to $2.3 billion in
one year, clearly a warning sign that investors should investigate.
EXAMPLE 15.1
Kraft Heinz recorded a loss of over $16 billion in 2018
due to impairment of goodwill and intangibles. The
write-down in value was linked largely with the acquisition of Kraft, and the
realization that the firm had overpaid. Kraft Heinz’s stock price dropped 27
percent on the day the impairment was announced.
EXAMPLE 15.2
Some Practical Advice
Many investors have come to rely on cash flows
because they cannot be easily manipulated.
While cash flows are very important, investors
need to be aware that companies can and do
manipulate cash flows. WorldCom, in its summer
2002 announcement that rocked the investment
community, admitted that it inflated not only
earnings but cash flows as well for several quar-
ters. Investors should pay careful attention to
“cash flows from operations.” For example, did
the company sell its accounts receivable, which
will immediately pump up operating cash flows?
Are some expenses being capitalized, thereby
creating an asset to be written off gradually
(this is what WorldCom did)? Are the proceeds
from securities trading being counted as part of
operating cash flow? Investors need to look for
issues such as these if they are to avoid being
fooled by data in the cash flow statement.3
EXHIBIT 15.3 | The Statement of Cash Flows for
Coca-Cola (all values in $ millions)
Period Ending Dec 31, 2018 Dec 31, 2017
Consolidated Net Income 6,434 1,248
Operating Activities
Depreciation 1,086 1,260
Adjustments to Net Income 1,309 1,059
Changes in Accounts Receivables (271) 189
Changes in Liabilities 990 (618)
Changes in Inventories (111) 20
Changes in Other Operating Activities (1,810) 3,883
Total Cash Flows from Operating Activities 7,627 7,041
Investing Activities
Capital Expenditures (1,102) (1,571)
Investments 8,079 1,448
Acquisitions 322 12
Other Cash Flows from Investing Activities (1,372) (2,201)
Total Cash Flows from Investing Activities 5,927 (2,312)
Financing Activities
Dividends Paid (6,644) (6,320)
Sale (Purchase) of Stock (436) (2,087)
Net Borrowings (3,229) 1,089
Other Cash Flows from Financing Activities (38) (129)
Total Cash Flows from Financing Activities (10,347) (7,447)
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes (262) 241
Changes in Cash and Cash Equivalents 2,945 (2,477)
396 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) currently formulates account-
ing and reporting standards in the United States.
• The auditor’s report does not guarantee the accuracy or the quality of the
earnings in an absolute sense; rather, it only attests that the statements are a
fair presentation of the company’s financial position.
Reading the footnotes Regardless of how closely a company adheres to good
accounting practices and how carefully the auditors do their job, investors still
need to examine the “notes to the financial statements,” or footnotes, if they are to
In certifying Coca-Cola’s financial statements, the
accounting firm preparing the statements makes a
statement such as, “In our opinion, the reported financial statements present
fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of the Coca-
Cola Company and subsidiaries.”
EXAMPLE 15.3
Investments Intuition
Does Repetition Lead to Complacency?
Public firms are required by law to have an
independent audit each year. A survey found that
30 percent of the 1,000 leading U.S. companies
have used the same auditor for the last 25 years
and 11 percent have used the same audit firm
every year for 50 years.4 This raises the question of
whether audit firms can become too complacent
or intertwined with the company being audited.
After all, they have a vested interest in maintaining
an established relationship, and they may look
less critically at their own work from previous years.
Some are now calling for public companies to
rotate their accounting firms every few years.
Ethics in Investing Accounting for Options
U.S. companies must deduct the cost of options
from their earnings. Technology companies argue
that such treatment hits them particularly hard.
Some companies seek to lower the costs of
options expenses. This is possible because the
cost of options must be estimated, leaving room
for interpretation.5 One way to lower costs is to
change the formula used to value options. For
example, options on stocks with greater volatility
are worth more. Therefore, if a company lowers
the volatility estimate, they lower the cost of the
option. According to one estimate, in 2004 some
200 companies cut the estimate of volatility by
an average of 17 percent.
While such actions are legal, are they really
ethical? After all, a primary argument for the
existence of options is that giving employees
options is conducive to retaining valuable
employees who will work hard to increase
firm value
The Problems with EPS 397
really understand the company’s financial situation. The footnotes are located after
the consolidated financial statements and can be found in 10-K and 10-Q Reports.
They often provide important information about the accounting methods being
used, any ongoing litigation, how revenue is recognized, information regarding off-
balance-sheet financing, and so forth.
• The footnotes can help an investor better understand the quality of the
reported earnings.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Given that a company’s financial statements are certified by its auditors, why
should investors be concerned about the information contained therein?
2. Assume a company has completed its financial statements and the income
statement shows a large loss. Does this mean the company will not have ade-
quate cash to pay its bills?
The Problems with EPS
Reported Earnings
Earnings derived under GAAP and reported on the income statement are known
as reported earnings. Although the financial statements are derived on the basis of
GAAP and are certified in an auditor’s report, problems exist with reported earn-
ings. The basic problem, simply stated, is that reported EPS for a company (i.e.,
accounting EPS) is based on a set of complex GAAP principles, which are subject
to judgment.
• EPS is not a precise figure that is readily comparable over time, and the EPS
figures across companies often are not comparable due to differences in the
accounting principles used to prepare the financial statements.
Many items in the balance sheet and income statement can be accounted for in
more than one way. Given the number of items that constitutes the financial state-
ments, the possible number of acceptable combinations that could be used is large.
A company could produce several legal and permissible EPS figures, depending
solely on the accounting principles used. The question that investors must try to
answer is, “Which EPS best represents the ‘true’ position of a company?”
Because reported EPS is a function of many accounting choices, it is extremely
difficult, if not impossible, for the “true” performance of a company to be reflected
consistently in one figure. Since each company is different, is it reasonable to expect
one accounting system to capture the true performance of all companies?
Reported Earnings GAAP
earnings, the “official”
earnings of a company as
reported to stockholders
and the SEC
Investments Intuition
Given the alternative accounting treatments,
investors must remember that reported EPS is not
the precise figure that it first appears to be. Unless
adjustments are made, the EPS of different com-
panies may not be comparable on either a time
series or a cross-sectional basis
398 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
Accountants are caught in the middle—between investors, who want a clean,
clear-cut EPS figure, and company management, which wants to present the finan-
cial statements in the most favorable light. After all, management hires the account-
ing firm, and, subject to certain guidelines, management can change accounting
firms. As long as the company follows GAAP, the accounting firm may find it dif-
ficult to resist management pressure to use particular principles. At some point, an
accounting firm may resign as a company’s auditor due to the problems and pres-
sures that can arise.
The FASB faces conflicting demands when it formulates or changes accounting
principles because various interest groups want items accounted for in specific ways.
The end result is that the “standards” issued by the FASB are often compromises
that do not fully resolve the particular issue; in some cases, they create additional
complications.
Should the FASB falter in its job, or investors demand “tighter” accounting rules,
as they did in 2002 in the face of several company accounting scandals, the govern-
ment can intervene and issue its own rulings. The Securities and Exchange Com-
mission (SEC) has the authority to do so because corporations must file detailed
financial data with it. The SEC has issued some definitions of acceptable accounting
practices over the years, thereby acting as a prod to the accounting groups to con-
tinue their progress.
The Sarbanes Oxley Act (SOX) passed by Congress in 2002 was largely in
response to the accounting scandals involving Enron, WorldCom, Global Cross-
ing, and other companies that blew up financially in spectacular fashion. SOX
represented a very significant change in federal securities laws and demon-
strates that such changes do occur from time to time. Concisely stated, this act
mandated that companies must submit an annual report to the SEC outlining
the effectiveness of their internal accounting controls and provide increased
financial disclosures. Substantial civil and criminal penalties can be imposed for
noncompliance.
Has the Situation Improved?
With the passage of SOX, one might logically assume that the accounting situation
has improved. And indeed, companies are spending much more on accounting
compliance as a result of SOX.
In general, changes in regulatory oversight have had a significant impact in
improving the corporate situation. CEOs no longer handpick the Board of Direc-
tors for the company. Boards have real power, and directors have significant respon-
sibilities. Many boards have a majority of independent directors and have separate
committees for important functions such as audit and compensation. Although
more remains to be done, the corporate governance situation is better today than
it was in the past.
FAS 133, which is concerned with financial derivatives
and hedging, was issued in June 1998. The standard and
its supporting documents now total more than 800 pages. There have been
over 200 restatements related to derivatives accounting.
The Problems with EPS 399
Financial reports today, however, remain difficult to understand. Estimates by
companies are rampant, and the assumptions and rationales behind these estimates
may be difficult to uncover.
The quality of earnings Some EPS figures are said to be “better” than others in the
sense that they have been derived using more conservative principles. In other words,
they are of higher quality. Smart investors recognize that earnings numbers are often
the result of subjective judgments, compromises, and changes in accounting practices.
Quality assessments are typically difficult to make and require considerable
expertise in accounting and financial analysis. When it is difficult to assess the qual-
ity of a company’s earnings, one alternative is to look at the first item on the income
statement, which is sales, or revenues. Is revenue growth slowing or increasing?
Unless (legitimate) revenues are growing over time, earnings will suffer, and the
quality may be suspect. Because of the importance of earnings quality, more and
more information sources are focusing on it.
One of the primary reasons that earnings quality has been called into doubt in
recent years is the proliferation of various EPS numbers. We examine this issue next.
What about adjusted earnings? As if the problems with reported earnings are
not bad enough, companies may use another measure of EPS, with varying levels of
subjectivity. Let’s examine the differences in alternative earnings measures.6
• Net income is also called reported earnings or GAAP earnings. It is the “official”
audited number on the income statement derived under GAAP and filed with
the SEC. It is earnings from continuing operations before extraordinary items.
• Adjusted earnings (also referred to as “pro forma earnings,” “operating earn-
ings,” “core earnings,” or “street earnings”) takes net income and adjusts it
by leaving out nonrecurring or unusual items (sometimes called special
items). Examples include restructuring charges and gains on the sale of assets.
Adjusted earnings is not an audited measure, and there are no rules on how
to calculate it, leaving companies free to do as they choose.
Adjusted Earnings Net
income adjusted for non-
recurring or unusual items
For a take on earnings quality, consider J.P. Morgan’s 2011
third-quarter earnings report. The company raised its
quarterly earnings by almost $2 billion by using a debit valuation adjustment,
allowed under accounting rules. Essentially, the market value of J.P. Morgan’s
debt declined, which allowed the company to report this “gain” as a profit.
Some investors view such gains as poor earnings quality, and Moody’s Investors
Services removes it when evaluating a bank’s earnings.
EXAMPLE 15.5
In late 2018, Tesla reported adjusted EPS of $1.93
versus analysts’ average estimates of $2.20, thus it missed
earnings. EPS on an unadjusted basis, however, was substantially lower at only
$0.78. The stock price reaction to the earnings miss was minimal because the
firm gave positive forward guidance and revenues beat analysts’ estimates.
Using the Financial Statements to Analyze FCF, ROE, and EPS 401
• Obtain other opinions, found in sources such as The Value Line Investment Sur-
vey, which has its own independent analysts.
• Study the cash flow statement. Firms need cash to operate, and it is more
difficult to disguise problems where cash is concerned. Investors should cal-
culate free cash flow (FCF), defined as the money left after all bills are paid.11
Fast-growing companies may have negative FCF for several years and still be
okay, but mature companies with negative FCF are frequently experiencing
financial problems.
Investors who find U.S. accounting comparisons difficult often have additional prob-
lems when analyzing foreign companies due to their different accounting practices.
The United States is generally considered to have the strictest standards, which are
based on a set of detailed rules. Foreign companies listed on U.S. securities exchanges
are allowed to file U.S. financial statements using the international standards.
The International Accounting Standards Board formulated International Finan-
cial Reporting Standards (IFRS) that are now used by most companies worldwide.
GAAP is based on a set of detailed rules, while IFRS seeks to apply guiding principles
of accounting, allowing more flexibility and judgment.
In August 2008, the SEC proposed a plan whereby all U.S. companies would switch
to IFRS by 2014, essentially replacing U.S. GAAP. However, IFRS and U.S. GAAP con-
tinue as the two predominant, yet separate, financial reporting frameworks. There is
continuing advancement of IFRS globally, and many believe IFRS will continue to be
more fully incorporated into the U.S. financial reporting system over time.
Checking Your Understanding
3. Sarbanes Oxley ended most of the fraudulent accounting practices recently
publicized and ensures that investors can fully understand the financial state-
ments and their implications. Agree or disagree, and explain your reasoning.
4. In reporting their results, companies may choose to emphasize adjusted earn-
ings. Why would they do this?
Using the Financial Statements to Analyze
FCF, ROE, and EPS
We can use a company’s financial statements to analyze its FCF, return on equity
(ROE) and EPS, as illustrated below. In evaluating these alternative measures, we
rely on the three most prominent financial statements, along with performing
standard ratio analysis and the DuPont analysis. It is important to note that different
definitions of EPS are available, such as basic and diluted EPS, with each form offer-
ing two versions, including or excluding extraordinary items. This analysis focuses
on basic EPS excluding extraordinary items.
Analyzing Free Cash Flow (FCF)
FCF is a crucial input in firm valuation because it represents the cash flows
that are free for use in making payments to the firm’s security holders and for
11 Free cash flow is discussed in more detail in Chapter 10.
making investments. FCF comes in two basic forms, free cash flow to the firm
(FCFF) and free cash flow to equity (FCFE). By relying on the statement of cash
flows, the formula used to derive each of these measures can be condensed from
what was presented in Chapter 10. FCFF represents the cash flows available to
all the firm’s security holders, whereas FCFE represents cash flows to the firm’s
equity holders.
The two FCF measures are derived by combining three values as follows:
FCFF CFO fixed capital investment interest
FCFE f
( )1 t
CFO iixed capital investment net borrowings
where
CFO cash flow from operating activities
Fixed capital investtment investment in fixed assets capital expenditures
pl
(
uus acquisitions
Interest after tax interest expense
)
( )1 t ,,derived as interest expense multiplied
by minus the fi1 rrm’s tax rate
Net borrowings the value of short- and long-tterm borrowing by the firm
Analyzing Return on Assets (ROA)
ROA is an important measure of a company’s profitability. It is a product of two
factors.
Net profit (income) margin net income
sales
Asset turnover saales
total assets
The first ratio affecting ROA, the net profit margin, measures the company’s
earning power on its sales (revenues). How much return is realized from sales, given
all costs? Obviously, the more a company earns per dollar of sales, the better.
Asset turnover is a measure of efficiency. Given some amount of total assets, how
much in sales is generated? The more sales per dollar of assets, the better. A com-
pany may have some assets that are unproductive, thereby adversely affecting its
efficiency.
making investments. FCF comes in two basic forms, free cash flow to the firm
(FCFF) and free cash flow to equity (FCFE). By relying on the statement of cash
flows, the formula used to derive each of these measures can be condensed from
what was presented in Chapter 10. FCFF represents the cash flows available to
all the firm’s security holders, whereas FCFE represents cash flows to the firm’s
equity holders.
The two FCF measures are derived by combining three values as follows:
FCFF CFO fixed capital investment interest
FCFE f
( )1 t
CFO iixed capital investment net borrowings
where
CFO cash flow from operating activities
Fixed capital investtment investment in fixed assets capital expenditures
pl
(
uus acquisitions
Interest after tax interest expense
)
( )1 t ,,derived as interest expense multiplied
by minus the fi1 rrm’s tax rate
Net borrowings the value of short- and long-tterm borrowing by the firm
Analyzing Return on Assets (ROA)
ROA is an important measure of a company’s profitability. It is a product of two
factors.
Net profit (income) margin net income
sales
Asset turnover saales
total assets
The first ratio affecting ROA, the net profit margin, measures the company’s
earning power on its sales (revenues). How much return is realized from sales, given
all costs? Obviously, the more a company earns per dollar of sales, the better.
Asset turnover is a measure of efficiency. Given some amount of total assets, how
much in sales is generated? The more sales per dollar of assets, the better. A com-
pany may have some assets that are unproductive, thereby adversely affecting its
efficiency.
Using data from Exhibits 15.2 and 15.3, the FCFF and FCFE
for Coca-Cola for 2018 are as follows (all $ values in billions):
FCFF $
FCFE
0.950 7.5607 627 1 102 0 322 1 0 25
7 627
. ( . . ) ( . )
. (11 102 0 322 3 229 3 618. . ) . .$
FCFF is frequently greater than FCFE; however, in this case the difference is more pro-
nounced than usual because Coca-Cola significantly reduced its debt balance during
2018. Typically, a growing firm increases its borrowing level over time
Using the Financial Statements to Analyze FCF, ROE, and EPS 403
ROA can be expressed as the product of these two components12
:
ROA net income
sales
sales
total assets
ROA net profit margin asset turnover
(15-1)
Return on assets (ROA) is a fundamental measure of company profitability,
reflecting how effectively and efficiently a firm is using its assets. Obviously, the
higher the net income for a given amount of assets, the better the return. Coca-
Cola’s ROA is 7.73 percent. The ROA can be improved by increasing net profit
margin or by using assets more efficiently.
One component of ROA may be able to offset poor performance in the other.
A low net profit margin can be offset if the company can generate more sales per
dollar of assets than comparable companies. Conversely, poor turnover can be over-
come by high profitability. We now focus on the return to shareholders by examin-
ing the ROE.
Analyzing Return on Equity (ROE)
An important variable in security analysis is return on equity (ROE) because it
is a key component in determining earnings and dividend growth. Analysts and
investors decompose ROE into its critical components in order to identify adverse
impacts on ROE and to help predict future trends in ROE.
To understand and calculate ROE, the effects of leverage must be considered.
The leverage ratio measures how the firm finances its assets. Basically, firms can
finance with either debt or equity. Debt, though a cheaper source of financing,
is riskier because of the fixed interest payments that must be paid to avoid bank-
ruptcy. Leverage can magnify the returns to stockholders or diminish them. Thus,
any given ROA can be magnified into a higher ROE by the judicious use of debt
financing. Of course, the converse also applies.
• For a typical profitable company that uses debt, ROE will be larger than
ROA.
Return on Assets (ROA)
The accounting rate of
return on a firm’s assets
Return on Equity
(ROE) The accounting
rate of return on stock-
holders’ equity
Using the data for Coca-Cola from Exhibits 15.1 and 15.2
Coca-Cola’s ROA can be derived as follows (all $ values
in billions):
Net income/sales $ /$
Sales/total assets $
34.300 0.18766 434.
334.300 0.4122/$83 216.
ROA or0.1876 0.4122 0 0773 7 73. . %
404 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
To more easily capture the effects of leverage, we use an equity multiplier rather
than a debt percentage. The equity multiplier reflects the amount of assets financed
per dollar of stockholders’ equity. For example, a ratio of two would indicate that
the firm finances $2 in assets with $1 in stockholders’ equity:
Equity multiplier total assets
stockholders’ equity
To calculate ROE, we combine ROA and leverage as shown in Equation 15-2:
ROE ROA equity multiplier (15-2)
For Coca-Cola, its use of leverage nearly quintupled its ROA to produce an ROE
of approximately 37.88 percent.
The Accounting Determinants of EPS
EPS is the culmination of several important functions going on within a company.
By analyzing key financial ratios, analysts can determine whether a company’s prof-
itability is increasing or decreasing, and why. This analysis will assist the analyst in
projecting the firm’s future profitability.
The following accounting identity establishes the relationship between EPS
and ROE:
EPS ROE book value per share (15-3)
where book value per share is the accounting value of stockholder equity.
In 2018, Coca-Cola’s equity multiplier was 4.90, calculated
as total assets divided by stockholder equity. The equity
multiplier indicates the level of financial leverage a firm employs. In effect,
Coke uses $1 of equity to finance $4.90 of assets.
EXAMPLE 15.10
Combining these two factors, ROA and leverage, for
Coca-Cola produces the following:
ROE 4.90 37.88%7 73. %
EXAMPLE 15.11
Investments Intuition
What this analysis does not show is the impact
of leverage on a company’s risk. We are exam-
ining only the determinants of EPS. However,
as we know from our discussion of valuation,
two factors, EPS and P/E ratio, are required to
determine value. An increase in leverage may
increase the riskiness of the company more
than enough to offset the increased EPS, thereby
lowering the company’s value. Investors must
consider both dimensions of the value of a stock,
the return side and the risk side
Using the Financial Statements to Analyze FCF, ROE, and EPS 405
Estimating the Sustainable Growth Rate
An important part of company analysis is the determination of a sustainable growth
rate in earnings and dividends. This rate represents the rate at which a company can
grow from internal sources, without the issuance of additional securities. It provides
a benchmark for assessing a company’s actual or target growth rate. A company
growing faster than the sustainable growth rate will have to issue additional securi-
ties, which could dilute the existing equity (in the case of stock issues) or increase
the financial risk (in the case of debt issues).
The sustainable growth rate, typically designated as g, is the product of the reten-
tion rate (b)—which is calculated as 1.0 minus the dividend payout ratio—and
ROE, as shown in Equation 15-4:
g b ROE payout ratio ROE( )1 (15-4)
Equation 15-4 is a primary calculation in fundamental security analysis and is
often used by security analysts.
A problem with estimating the sustainable growth rate is that the data used may
not come from a “normal” year. Basing a projection on one year’s results can result in
a faulty estimate; this is particularly true for companies in cyclical industries. There-
fore, average data are probably more appropriate for performing the calculations. 13
The internal growth rate estimated by Equation 15-4 is reliable only if a com-
pany’s profitability, as measured by ROE, remains in balance. If the ROE grows or
declines significantly in the future, the firm’s actual growth rate will be quite differ-
ent than the growth rate estimated by Equation 15-4.
What matters is the future expected growth rate, not the actual historical growth rate.
If investors expect a different growth rate in the future, they should use the
expected growth rate not the calculation based on current data. Payout ratios for
most companies vary over time, but reasonable estimates can often be obtained by
using an average of recent years. Estimating future ROE is more challenging.
Sustainable Growth
Rate A firm’s expected
growth rate in earnings
and dividends, often
calculated as the product
of ROE and the retention
rate of earnings
Concepts in Action
Estimating Growth Rates
Many investors get carried away when esti-
mating the expected growth rate in EPS for com-
panies they find attractive. The natural tendency
is to rely on historical growth rates because that
is the only objective evidence available. An
immediate problem is deciding what period of
time is relevant in forecasting the future, par-
ticularly when significant differences exist. For
example, if a company had a 15 percent annual
growth rate in EPS for the last 10 years, but a
25 percent annual growth rate for the last five
years, which (if either) is more likely to be indica-
tive of the future?
When we think about it logically, there must
be limits to how fast a company can continue to
grow, whether in price or EPS. Clearly, some can
grow extremely fast for a few years. But an anal-
ysis of companies shows that the outer limit for
truly long-term growth is about 20 percent. And
most companies do not achieve this growth rate
over long periods of time
406 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
Checking Your Understanding
5. Assume that a company uses no debt to finance its operations. What is the
relationship between its ROA and its ROE?
6. Assume that a company’s EPS is $3.00 and that it pays $1.00 in dividends. Its
ROE is 18 percent. Calculate an estimate of the firm’s internal growth rate.
Earnings Estimates
Stock valuation is forward looking. The EPS that investors use to value stocks is the
future (expected) EPS. In doing fundamental security analysis with EPS, an investor
needs to (1) know how to obtain an earnings estimate, (2) consider the accuracy of
the earnings estimate obtained, and (3) understand the role of earnings surprises
in impacting stock prices. We consider each of these topics in turn.
A Forecast of EPS
Security analysts’ estimates of earnings Among the most obvious sources of
earnings estimates are security analysts, who forecast earnings as part of their job. The
consensus forecast is generally superior to the forecasts of individual analysts. Thus,
security analysts’ consensus estimates are a practical and useful proxy for the market’s
expectations about EPS. The consensus reflects the average EPS estimate. The number
of analysts covering a particular company can vary widely, from 1 to 50, whereas some
smaller firms are not followed by any analysts. Services that provide earnings forecasts
to institutional clients include I/B/E/S, First Call, and Zacks Investment Research.
Earnings estimates are available to individual investors from sources such as Value
Line and Yahoo! Finance.15 Examples include the following:
• The Value Line Investment Survey forecasts quarterly earnings for several quar-
ters ahead for each company covered.
Consider this—Cisco, one of the great growth
stocks of modern times, grew almost 100 per-
cent a year for a 10-year period through March
2000.14 Fantastic growth, and it produced great
performance for Cisco’s stockholders. However,
had Cisco grown at that rate for the subsequent
10 years, it would have had a total market value
of $520 trillion in 2010. This would have exceeded
the combined value of every stock in the world.
Simply put, very rapid growth cannot last indef-
initely. It is not possible for a wide variety of rea-
sons including competition, regulation, changes
in technology, poor management decisions, and
merely because rapid growth is more difficult to
accomplish on a large base value.
Take a well-known and highly successful
company like 3M. In the 15 years from the end
of 1998 through 2013, its stock price appreci-
ated by almost 300 percent. In contrast, over the
subsequent five years, the price appreciated
by only 36 percent. As great a stock as 3M has
been—and it has been a magnificent blue-chip
company—it has succumbed to the same dimin-
ished-growth fate as other successful firms.
Earnings Estimates 407
• Yahoo! Finance provides analyst estimates for a company under the section
titled “Analyst Coverage.” The average, low, and high estimates are shown,
along with the number of analysts making estimates. Current and next quarter
estimates are provided, along with current and next year.
Several studies suggest that individual analysts are indistinguishable in their abil-
ity to predict EPS. The practical implication of these findings is that, in general,
investors should pay more attention to the consensus forecast or the average of
several forecasts of EPS unless they have good reason to rely on a particular analyst
(such as proven performance for a particular company).
The Accuracy of Earnings Forecasts
Even if investors accept the relative superiority of analysts’ estimates, the fact
remains that analysts often over- or underestimate the earnings that are actually
realized. According to one study of almost 400 companies, analysts’ estimates aver-
aged 57 percent too high in the first month of a fiscal year, and the error was still an
average 12 percent by year’s end.
A study by Dreman and Berry covered approximately 500,000 brokerage ana-
lysts’ forecasts for an 18-year period. Analysts were given every advantage in the
study—for example, forecasts could be made in the same quarter as earnings were
reported, and the forecasts could be changed up to two weeks before the end of the
quarter. Nevertheless, the average annual error was 44 percent, and only 25 percent
of consensus estimates came within plus or minus 5 percent of reported earnings.
Furthermore, the error rate actually worsened over time.
Inaccurate earnings estimates can provide opportunities for investors. Analysts
are frequently wrong, and if investors can make better estimates of earnings for
particular companies, they can expect to profit from their astuteness.
Earnings Surprises
Studies establish that changes in earnings and stock prices are highly correlated.
However, the association between earnings and stock prices is more complicated
than simply demonstrating a correlation between earnings growth and stock-price
changes. Malkiel and Cragg concluded years ago that in making accurate one-year
predictions, “It is far more important to know what the market will think the growth
rate of earnings will be next year rather than to know the (actual) realized long-
term growth rate.”16 As Latane and Jones note the important point about EPS in
terms of stock prices is the difference between what the market (i.e., investors in
general) was expecting the EPS to be and what the company actually reported.17
A favorable earnings surprise, in which the actual earnings exceed the market’s
expectation, brings about an upward adjustment to the price of the stock as inves-
tors revise their probability beliefs about the company’s earnings. Conversely, an
unfavorable earnings surprise leads to a downward adjustment in price; in effect,
the market has been disappointed in its expectations.
In conclusion, stock prices are affected not only by the level of, and growth
in, earnings but also by the market’s expectations of earnings. Investors should be
Consensus Forecast Most
likely EPS value expected
by analysts
Earnings Surprises The
difference between a
firm’s actual earnings and
its expected earnings
16 Burton Malkiel and John Cragg, Expectations and the Structure of Share Prices, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research Monograph, 1982, 616.
17 Henry Latane and Charles Jones, “Standardized Unexpected Earnings—A Progress Report,” Journal of
Finance, 32 (December 1977): 1457–1465.
408 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
concerned with both earnings forecasts and the difference between the actual earn-
ings and the forecast—that is, the surprise. Therefore, fundamental analysis of earn-
ings should include more than a forecast; it should involve the role of the market’s
earnings expectations.
What happens when earnings are reported and the figures are below analysts’
estimates? Obviously, the price generally drops and in some cases sharply. The stock
market tends to be unforgiving about negative earnings surprises.
If the stock price drops sharply following such an announcement, should an
investor interested in owning the stock take the opportunity to purchase? Some
studies suggest no. The initial drop is often followed by additional price declines.
Earnings Guidance
Many companies have developed the practice of providing “guidance” on their
forthcoming quarterly earnings announcements. Such guidance often comes to be
expected by the market.
A trend has started whereby an increasing number of companies are discontin-
uing the process of providing earnings guidance. Warren Buffet, among others,
supports this development as he has argued that companies should not provide
guidance. In December 2002, Coca-Cola announced that it would no longer pro-
vide quarterly or annual EPS guidance. The company stated that it would “continue
to provide investors with perspectives on its value drivers, its strategic initiatives
and those factors critical to understanding [Coca-Cola’s] business and operating
environment.”
Yelp Inc. announced adjusted EPS that beat analyst
expectations by about 10 percent, yet its stock price
dropped by nearly 27 percent on the announcement day. Why? Yelp’s reported
revenues missed estimates by nearly 2 percent, and more importantly, its
guidance for future revenues was reduced by over 1 percent.
EXAMPLE 15.12
Some Practical Advice
Earnings Surprises Don’t Always Tell
the Entire Story
As noted, investors react to company quarterly
earnings reports; however, they also react to the
revenue number as well. Thus, EPS could meet
or beat analysts’ expectations, but if revenues
fall short of expectations, the stock price may
decline.
In late 2011, Green Mountain Coffee Roasters announced
that its revenues increased 91 percent. The stock dropped
almost 40 percent immediately. Why? The market’s expectation was for
revenues to increase approximately 100 percent, and the market had come to
believe that Green Mountain would always deliver on its expectations.
Earnings Estimates 409
The Earnings Game
Investors need to realize that the process of estimating earnings, announcing earn-
ings, and determining earnings surprises has become much more of a game, or
managed process, over time. The way the “game” is played by many companies and
analysts is as follows:
1. Analysts attempt to estimate what a particular company will earn each quarter.
2. A company may provide “guidance” as to what it thinks earnings will be. Com-
panies may subsequently revise their guidance numbers lower in a series of
steps, and the analysts follow by lowering their estimates.
3. This “talking the forecast down” results in the consensus forecast being
slightly below the actual expected number. The company now is likely to beat
the forecast, which provides a positive earnings surprise.
4. In the past, a positive earnings surprise typically led to stock price increase.
Now, however, positive earnings surprises have become commonplace. In
most quarters, the vast majority of companies show positive earnings surprises,
which means there is less impact from an earnings surprise than in the past.
5. Investors sometimes have to contend with “whisper forecasts,” which are unof-
ficial earnings estimates that circulate among professional investors before
earnings are announced. Think of these whisper numbers as the analysts’ true
expectation as opposed to the published consensus number. Some studies sug-
gest that these estimates are more accurate than the consensus estimates.
Obviously, investors must try to understand the earnings game and its likely
impact on stock prices. It has become more complicated as investors try to figure
out which forecast the actual earnings are expected to beat and which companies
are reporting true earnings surprises as opposed to managed earnings surprises.
Regulation FD, which became effective in October 2000, requires companies
to make public disclosure of important information to all investors at the same
time. Numerous companies are now releasing corporate information to all investors
simultaneously through Internet broadcasts.
Useful Information for Investors About Earnings
Estimates
Summarizing our discussion about earnings forecasts, we can note the following
useful information about the role, and use, of earnings forecasts in selecting com-
mon stocks:
1. Reported earnings are a key factor affecting stock prices; however, it is the
surprise element in the reports that often moves stock prices. Surprises typi-
cally involve the difference between the consensus analyst forecast and the
actual earnings.
2. There appears to be a lag in the adjustment of stock prices to earnings sur-
prises. This has been documented in numerous studies.
3. Surprises may occur because analyst estimates are off target. Alternatively,
companies may guide analysts to a slightly lower number than actually
expected, resulting in an earnings “surprise.”
4. Positive earnings surprises have outnumbered negative earnings surprises by
a ratio of three to one. Positive surprises are often attributed to the “earnings
guidance game.”
410 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
5. The size of the surprise is important information, with large surprises leading
to larger returns.
6. The best guideline to surprises may be revisions in analyst estimates. If esti-
mates are steadily being adjusted upward, a buy signal is indicated, and if the
adjustments are downward, a sell signal is indicated.
7. Investors interested in buying stocks that report bad news and suffer a sharp
decline may benefit by waiting a month or two. Chances are the stock will get
even cheaper after the initial sharp decline.
8. When estimating stock-price movements, investors must consider reported
earnings, earnings surprises, earnings forecasts, and other information con-
tained in the earnings announcement.
Alternatives to Earnings
Given the accounting problems with earnings and the difficulty in forecasting earn-
ings, it is not surprising that investors look at other fundamental data when select-
ing stocks. This is particularly true with newer companies that may not have positive
EPS, or the expectation thereof for several years. Tesla is a clear example of this—
given its limited profitability, investors must evaluate other dimensions.
A key variable is obviously revenues, or sales. After all, a company cannot have
earnings without reasonable revenues. Revenues not only lead to EPS for a company
but also make possible cash flows, which it uses to pay its bills and operate.
The Multiplier
The other half of the valuation framework is the appropriate price multiple. In effect,
the price multiple is a measure of the relative price of a stock. For example, investors
may be willing to pay 40 or 50 times earnings for some companies but only six or seven
times earnings for other companies. Why such a large difference? We will consider
this question below after we clarify the various multiples an investor may encounter.
The P/E Ratio
When discussing the P/E ratio, it is important to remember that different P/E ratios
can be calculated for the same stock at a point in time, including:
• P/E based on last year’s reported earnings
• P/E based on trailing 12-month (TTM) earnings
• P/E based on this year’s expected earnings
• P/E based on next year’s expected earnings
Furthermore, the EPS could be reported as GAAP EPS, operating (adjusted)
EPS, or core EPS being reported by Standard & Poor’s Corporation. Assuming we
limit ourselves to GAAP EPS, the differences in P/E ratios that investors encounter
can still be substantial.
Facebook reported record second-quarter earnings of
$1.74 up from $1.32 the prior year, yet the stock price
dropped by 19 percent. Why? The announced earnings were less than Wall
Street expectations.
The Multiplier 411
Determinants of the P/E Ratio
The justifiable P/E ratio equation indicates that the appropriate P/E ratio is a func-
tion of three factors:
P
E
D E
k g
1 1/ (15-5)
Investors attempting to determine an appropriate P/E ratio for a stock should
think in terms of these three factors and their likely changes:
• The higher the expected dividend payout ratio (D1
/E1
), other things being
equal, the higher the P/E ratio. However, “other things” are seldom equal. If
the payout rises, the expected growth rate in earnings and dividends, g, will
decline, thereby adversely affecting the P/E ratio. This decline occurs because
fewer funds are available for reinvestment in the business, thereby leading to
a decline in the expected growth rate, g.
• There is an inverse relationship between k (required return) and the P/E
ratio. Other things being equal, as k rises, the P/E ratio declines; as k declines,
the P/E ratio rises. The required return is a discount rate; thus, P/E ratios and
required returns move inversely to each other.
• P/E and g (growth) are directly related; the higher the g, other things being
equal, the higher the P/E ratio.18
Determinants of the P/B Ratio
The justifiable price-to-book (P/B) ratio equation indicates that the appropriate
P/B ratio is a function of three factors:
P
B
ROE g
k g (15-6)
where the terms in the equation are as previously defined.
Investors attempting to determine an appropriate P/B ratio for a stock should
consider the three factors included in the formula. The denominator in Equa-
tion 15-6 is identical to the denominator in Equation 15-5, and thus, the relation-
ships are consistent; justifiable P/B has an inverse relation with required return (k)
and a positive relation with growth (g).
The justifiable P/B equation identifies the crucial consideration for P/B as
the relation between ROE and k. A firm that is generating returns higher than its
required return (ROE > k) will have a justifiable P/B that is greater than 1.0. Such a
firm is creating positive value for its equity holders.
In 2019, Pfizer was trading at $38.
• Based on TTM (trailing 12-month) earnings, its P/E was 21.2.
• Based on expected earnings for 2019, its P/E was 13.3.
412 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
Determinants of the P/S Ratio
The justifiable price-to-sales (P/S) ratio equation indicates that the appropriate P/S
ratio is a function of four values:
P
S
E S D E g
k g
0 0 0 0 1/ / (15-7)
where
E S0 0/ earnings divided by sales which is the firm’s net pr, oofit margin
/ the firm’s current dividend payout ratioD E0 0
The other terms in Equation 15-7 are as defined in Equation 15-5.
Investors attempting to determine a stock’s appropriate P/S should consider the
measures included in Equation 15-7. The equation indicates that a company’s net
profit margin plays a crucial role in determining the stock’s appropriate P/S. All
else the same, firms with relatively high profit margins will have relatively high P/S.
As with Equations 15-5 and 15-6, the denominator of Equation 15-7 is “k–g,” and
thus, these two variables maintain the same relation with P/S as they had with P/E
and P/B.
Why Price Multiples Vary Among Companies
Stock prices reflect market expectations about a firm’s prospects. Companies that
the market believes will achieve high sales and earnings growth will tend to be
priced with higher multiples than companies with low expected growth rates. When
problems arise, however, price multiples can change quickly. Consider this quote
from The Wall Street Journal: “High-growth companies are complex machines. At the
first sign of problems, investors begin prodding areas they had never looked into.”19
• A primary factor in explaining price multiple differences among companies is
investor expectations about future growth prospects for the firms.
It is important to remember the role of interest rates, which are inversely related
to price multiples. When interest rates are declining, the largest impact is on the
multiples of growth stocks. This is because most of their earnings will occur far in
the future and will now be discounted at lower rates.
• The spread between the lowest multiples and the highest multiples for a set
of companies is typically large. Of course, the multiples for a company change
over time.
Research shows a link exists between P/E ratios and long-term earnings growth.
The results demonstrate that the highest P/E portfolio (portfolio containing the
highest P/E firms) had larger earnings growth than the lowest P/E portfolio over
the subsequent 10 years. However, additional analysis showed that the realized
growth rate of the highest P/E portfolio fell short of investor expectations, which
resulted in the stocks in the highest P/E portfolio underperforming.20
19 John Jannarone, “Green Mountain’s Landslide,” The Wall Street Journal (November 11, 2011): C10.
20 See Wan-Ting Wu, “The Forward E/P Ratio and Earnings Growth,” 2014, Advances in Accounting, 30:
128–142.
The Multiplier 413
The PEG Ratio
Some investors divide the P/E ratio by the earnings growth rate (specified in per-
cent) to obtain the PEG ratio:
PEG ratio /( )P E
g (15-8)
• The advantage of the PEG ratio is that it relates the P/E ratio to earnings
growth rather than relying on the P/E ratio by itself.
According to Peter Lynch, a former, highly successful manager of the Magel-
lan Fund, a fairly valued company’s P/E ratio will equal its expected growth rate.
Therefore, an indication of undervaluation could be a stock with a P/E less than its
earnings growth rate. Like most calculations of this type, the PEG ratio is only a rule
of thumb. There are no assurances that one is paying too much or too little.
The PEG ratio is often used as an analysis metric by investors following a growth
at a reasonable price (GARP) investment philosophy. Investors following a GARP
approach do not mind paying a high multiple for a firm if the firm has strong
growth prospects.
One problem with the PEG ratio is that it relates a ratio to a percentage num-
ber. Another is that different earnings growth rates can be used to calculate it. For
example, Standard & Poor’s Outlook uses a three-year compound annual growth
rate, whereas others use recent earnings growth rates or estimated earnings growth.
PEG Ratio The P/E ratio
divided by the earnings
growth rate
Some Practical Advice
Stocks with High P/E Ratios Carry
Substantial Risk
Investors like to see growth in earnings, and
high-flying growth stocks often have very high
P/E ratios. The average P/E on the S&P 500 stocks
for a very long period has been about 16. In late
2018, Amazon had a P/E of 87, which is obviously
extremely high. In the third quarter of 2018, Amazon
missed its revenue estimate and its price dropped
8 percent in one day. With a P/E of 87, expecta-
tions about earnings are very high, and investors
want results now. As a company’s P/E ratio rises, the
downside risk grows. Therefore, remember that the
higher a stock’s valuation, the greater the expec-
tations about earnings, and the larger the risk of
disappointments and price declines.
Some Practical Advice
Growth at a Reasonable Price (GARP)
In late 2018, Amazon had a P/E ratio of 87, which
represented a valuation that was higher than
many investors were willing to pay. However, at
the time, Bloomberg reported a five-year growth
for Amazon of 58 percent. Based on these num-
bers, Amazon’s PEG ratio was only 1.5, which is
considered a reasonable value for a high-quality
firm. In contrast, at the time, McDonald’s had a
P/E of 24 and a growth rate of 7 percent, which
corresponds with a PEG ratio of 3.4. Therefore,
investors following a GARP approach would view
Amazon to have the more attractive valuation of
the two firm
416 Chapter 15 Company Analysis
It should come as no surprise that because security analysis involves the uncertain
future, mistakes will be made, and analysts will differ in their outlooks for a particu-
lar company. At any time, some investors may think it is time to sell, while others see
a buy opportunity.
As we might expect, security analysis in the 21st century is often done differently
from how it was done in the past. The reason for this change is not because we have
a better understanding of the basis of security analysis. Rather, the differences now
have to do with the increasingly sophisticated use of personal computers to per-
form many calculations quickly and objectively. For example, a “neural network”
is a computer program that attempts to imitate the brain in doing security analysis
and choosing stocks. One program can examine dozens of different variables for
thousands of companies, searching for patterns that might be profitable to exploit
and that are too subtle for humans to detect.
Summary
• The analysis of individual companies, which is the last of three steps in fun-
damental security analysis, considers the characteristics of a company, such as
sales and earnings growth, management quality, and level of competition. It
involves applying the valuation procedures explained in earlier chapters.
• Intrinsic value (a company’s justified price) can be estimated using either a
discount model or a multiplier model. Intrinsic value is then compared to the
current market price in order to determine whether the stock is undervalued
or overvalued.
• An important first step in fundamental analysis is to understand the earnings
per share (EPS) of companies. The financial statements can be used to under-
stand the accounting basis of EPS.
• The balance sheet shows a company’s assets and liabilities as of a specific date,
whereas the income statement shows the flows during a period for the items
that determine net income. The cash flow statement shows a firm’s sources
and uses of cash.
• Although financial statements are certified by the accounting profession,
alternative accounting principles can result in financial measures that are not
precise or readily comparable.
Concepts in Action
Sooner or Later, One or More Zombies
Will Get You
Investors interested in selecting stocks should
do the best company analysis they can. It is
not easy, and it takes time. Regardless of one’s
diligence, however, the analysis will not always
work out. Stocks will not perform as expected.
In Wall Street terms, you will have some “dead
money.” Your investment will be “alive” and in
play, but as far as helping your portfolio, it will
be dead—a zombie. In mid-2011, 30 percent of
the S&P 100 Index, which focuses on large-cap
stocks, had a stock price below their value 10
years earlier. This included some of the best-
known stocks in the United States, such as Micro-
soft, Pfizer, and General Electric.
Questions 417
• Changes in earnings are directly related to changes in stock prices. To assess
expected earnings, investors often consider the sustainable growth rate, which
is the product of ROE and the earnings retention rate.
• EPS forecasts are available from several sources that compile analysts’ fore-
casts; however, such forecasts are subject to error.
• The difference between actual and forecast EPS is important because of the
role of the market’s expectations about earnings. Standardized unexpected
earnings (SUE) considers the unexpected portion of quarterly earnings.
• Price multiples represent half of the multiplier model, indicating the amount
per dollar of firm characteristic investors are willing to pay for a stock. It rep-
resents the relative price of a stock, with some companies carrying high multi-
ples and others having low ones.
• Price multiples are influenced directly by investors’ expectations of the future
growth of sales and earnings and inversely by the required rate of return.
• There are different P/E ratios in use at any time. Typically, the P/E is based
on the most recent 12-month earnings. A forward P/E uses earnings for the
next year.
• Price multiples vary among companies primarily because of differences in
investors’ expectations about the future prospects for the companies. If inves-
tors lower their expectations, the price of the stock may drop, while firm per-
formance remains constant or even rises.
• The PEG ratio relates the P/E for a company to its expected growth rate in
earnings. Some consider a company to be fairly valued if its P/E ratio is equal
to its expected growth in earnings.
