579CHAPTER 22
At long last you have arrived at the
end of your quest to learn enough
about investing to manage your
inheritance sensibly. Now that you
know some basics about how to
invest, what your alternatives are,
and what to expect, you must con-
sider how well you are doing as
an investor. Measuring portfolio
performance is the bottom line of
investing. Everyone wants to know
how they are performing as inves-
tors, either in managing their own
portfolios or entrusting their money
to others to manage for them. Fur-
thermore, if investors use others
to manage their money or read
investing newsletters, they should
be aware of what to look for when
investment results are presented.
This chapter explains what is involved in the evaluation of investment perfor-
mance. While it might seem like a straightforward process to determine how well an
investor’s portfolio has performed, such is not always the case. This chapter covers
well-known measures of portfolio performance such as the Sharpe measure and also
discusses style investing, performance benchmarks, and performance presentation
standards.
We have now discussed the major components of the investing process. One
important issue that remains is the “bottom line” task: evaluating and understand-
ing portfolio performance. This is important regardless of whether an investor
manages his or her own funds or invests indirectly through an investment com-
pany. Direct investing can be time consuming and costly. If the results are inad-
equate, why do it (unless the investor simply enjoys it)? On the other hand, if
professional portfolio managers are employed, it is necessary to know how well
they perform. If manager A consistently outperforms manager B, other things
being equal, investors should prefer manager A. Alternatively, if neither A nor
B outperforms an index fund, investors may prefer neither. The obvious point is
Evaluation of Investment
Performance
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Explain the issues involved in eval-
uating portfolio performance and
calculate common measures of
portfolio performance.
• Evaluate media claims about the
performance of various portfolios,
such as mutual funds and ETFs.
• Calculate time-and-money-
weighted returns and explain when
each should be used.
• Describe concepts such as
performance attribution and style
analysis
580 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
that performance has to be evaluated before intelligent decisions can be made
about existing portfolios.
Currently, thousands of mutual funds are operating, with several trillion dollars
under management. More than 90 million individuals own mutual funds. The pen-
sion fund universe is also very large. The majority of U.S. pension plans employ mul-
tiple managers. In addition to these money managers, trusts, discretionary accounts,
and endowment funds have portfolios that must be evaluated. Professional portfolio
management is an unforgiving profession, with managers hired and fired regularly
because of their performance, both absolute and relative to other managers.
Portfolio evaluation techniques have become more sophisticated, and the
demands by portfolio clients more intense. The broad acceptance of modern port-
folio theory has changed the evaluation process and how it is viewed.
A Framework for Evaluating and Assessing
Portfolio Performance
We will consider four broad issues in evaluating portfolio performance:
1. Performance Measurement Issues—A critical concern for investors is to cor-
rectly determine how a portfolio performed over some time period. Thus, the
portfolio’s results have to be correctly measured and analyzed.
2. Well-Known Measures of Performance—Several risk-adjusted measures of
portfolio performance have been available for many years. One or more
of these are often referred to in discussions of portfolio performance, and
therefore investors need to be aware of them.
3. Performance Attribution and Style Analysis—Going beyond measuring a
portfolio’s performance, the concept of performance attribution seeks to
determine why a portfolio had the return it did over some specified period
of time. This relates to style analysis, which describes a portfolio manager’s
investing style.
4. Portfolio Presentation Standards—How should the results of a portfolio be
presented to those directly affected by that portfolio—in other words, from
investment manager to client? Thirty years ago there were few standards or
guidelines. Now there are a clearly stated set of standards to be followed when
presenting portfolio results.
We consider each of these issues in turn.
Performance Measurement Issues
If you read financial magazines and newspapers, you will be exposed to claims from
various mutual fund companies touting the performance of their funds. This is an
ongoing process, and therefore it may be beneficial to learn to quickly spot the
deficiencies in such ads.
You will see over time, a changing set of fund companies promoting their selected
funds. Why does this happen? When a fund achieves good ratings, based on the lat-
est measurement periods, companies hurry to put out ads proclaiming the new
stellar ratings. Investors are attracted to top performing funds and start to buy the
ones that are rated highly. The problem is that the ratings reflect past performance,
not future performance. Often the fund happened to be in the right sectors, or the
Performance Measurement Issues 581
right stocks, for the time period involved. These stocks and sectors typically do not
continue to perform strongly, and investors end up disappointed because they buy
into the funds when it is too late.
Or consider an excerpt from an ad placed by a well-known mutual fund com-
pany. This ad listed five funds said to be “peer-beating funds.” It highlighted five
of its funds that were in the first quartile of Lipper Quartile rankings for one year,
three years, and the life of the fund. How should you react to this information?
In this case, the fund’s average annual returns were not shown. What if, for a
one-year period, one of these funds achieved a first-quartile ranking although it had
a 2 percent positive return, less than you could have earned in T-bills? What about
the funds’ risk—would you want to know something about that? Why are 5- and
10-year returns not highlighted, as they often are in other ads? Although the infor-
mation presented is totally legitimate, one might wonder if it is selectively presented
to put these funds in the best light.
Or consider another ad placed at the same time by a large company that fea-
tured only one of its funds. The only real message was that this fund has a four-star
overall rating out of 300 other funds in the same category. There was no mention of
returns, risk, benchmark returns, or anything else.
In order to correctly measure portfolio performance, certain factors must be
considered. In the following section, we discuss the most important factors that
must be accounted for in order to correctly assess a portfolio’s performance.
To initiate our discussion about measuring portfolio performance, assume that
you are evaluating the GoGrowth mutual fund, a domestic equity fund in the cat-
egory of large growth (it emphasizes large-capitalization growth stocks). This fund
earned a 19 percent return for its shareholders for 2019. It claims in an advertise-
ment that it is the number one performing mutual fund in its category. As a share-
holder, what can you conclude about GoGrowth’s performance, both absolutely
and relatively?
Three Questions to Answer in Measuring Portfolio
Performance
The first question to be answered is obvious: Was the return on the portfolio ade-
quate, all things considered? Every investor is concerned with this issue because the
objective of investing is to increase, or at least protect, financial wealth. Unsatisfac-
tory results must be detected so that changes can be made.
The second question to be answered is related to the first. How much risk did
the investor, or portfolio manager, take in creating and managing the portfolio?
We have stressed throughout this text that you must think in terms of both risk and
return because they are opposite sides of the same coin.
It is inappropriate to consider only the returns from investment alternatives.
Although investors prefer higher returns, rational investors are also risk-averse. To
evaluate portfolio performance properly, we must determine whether the returns
are large enough given the risk involved. If we are to assess portfolio performance
correctly, we must evaluate performance on a risk-adjusted basis.
The third question concerns comparisons, or benchmarks. What return should
have been earned on the portfolio, given the risk taken and the alternative returns
available from comparable investments over the same period? This issue is so impor-
tant that when someone asks you how your portfolio performed compared to the
market, the proper response is to say, “We need to compare my portfolio’s perfor-
mance to the proper benchmark.”
582 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
The DJIA is arguably the most famous stock market index in the world, widely
reported and widely recognized by most investors. Very few investors, however,
use it as a performance benchmark—this is almost universally true for money
managers. Why? The Dow, which is composed of 30 blue-chip stocks, is not as
good an indicator of the breadth of today’s stock market as are some other
indexes.
It is critical in evaluating portfolio performance to compare the returns obtained
on the portfolio being evaluated with the returns that could have been obtained
from a comparable alternative. The measurement process must involve relevant and
obtainable alternatives; that is, the benchmark portfolio must be a legitimate alter-
native that accurately reflects the objectives of the portfolio being evaluated. One
might assume that, unlike the Dow, the S&P 500 would be a widely accepted bench-
mark portfolio because it is typically cited by institutional investors. And indeed it
is often used as a benchmark, but as we shall see, it may not adequately capture the
various dimensions of a portfolio.
The S&P 500 is the most frequently used benchmark for evaluating the per-
formance of institutional portfolios such as those of pension funds and mutual
funds. However, many observers now agree that multiple benchmarks are
more appropriate when evaluating portfolio returns. Customized benchmarks,
explained later in the chapter, can be constructed to more accurately evaluate a
manager’s style.
Given the three questions mentioned earlier, what can we say about the 19
percent return reported for the GoGrowth fund? If we know nothing about
the fund’s risk, little can be said about its performance. After all, GoGrowth’s
managers may have taken twice the risk of comparable portfolios. Further-
more, even if we know GoGrowth’s risk, its 19 percent return is meaningful only
when compared to a legitimate benchmark. Obviously, if the average return for
comparable funds was 23 percent in 2019, we would rate its performance unfa-
vorable. Therefore, we must make relative comparisons in performance measure-
ment, and an important related issue is the relevant benchmark for evaluating
the performance.
Finally, note that it is not unusual to pick up a publication from the popular press
and see two different mutual funds of the same type—for example, two different
small-cap growth funds advertise themselves as the number one performer. How
can this occur?
The answer is simple. Each of these funds is using a different time period over
which to measure performance. For example, one fund could use the 10 years end-
ing December 31, 2019, while the other fund uses the 5 years ending June 30, 2019.
Mutual fund sponsors may emphasize different time periods in promoting their
performance. Funds can also define the group or index to which comparisons are
made differently.
Benchmark Portfolio
An alternative portfolio
against which to measure
a portfolio’s performance
Over a recent five-year period, small-cap value funds
significantly outperformed large-cap value funds.
Therefore, the typical owner of a small-cap value fund will have outperformed
the S&P 500 and should not compare his or her results to the S&P 500, but
instead to the Russell 2000 Value Index.
EXAMPLE 22.1
Performance Measurement Issues 583
Mark Hulbert publishes the Hulbert Financial Digest, which has tracked the perfor-
mance of investment advisors for more than 30 years. Consider this quote:
“I am constantly bombarded with questions about investment advisers that my Hulbert
Financial Digest (HFD) has not been monitoring. Inevitably, the inquiries focus on
alleged performance that is tantalizingly good—so good, in fact, that even if actual per-
formance were only half as good, it still would justify our immediately allocating all our
investment portfolios to following the adviser or strategy in question. My reply is always
the same: don’t believe it.”1
Return Calculations
Performance measurement begins with portfolio valuations and transactions trans-
lated into rate of return. When portfolio performance is evaluated, the investor
should be concerned with the total change in wealth. As discussed throughout this
text, a proper measure of this return is the total return (R), which captures both the
income component and the capital gains (or losses) component of return.
The market value of a portfolio can be measured at the beginning and ending of
a period, and the portfolio return (Rp) can be calculated as:
R V V
V
p
E B
B
(22-1)
where VE is the ending value of the portfolio and VB is its beginning value.
Some Practical Advice
Buyer Beware
Performance evaluation extends to the evalua-
tion of money managers and investment news-
letters. A large number of newsletters offering
investment advice compete for readers. Think of
a newsletter charging $125 a year and consider
the marginal cost of producing and mailing one
more newsletter. It is easy to understand why
these newsletters work hard at attracting readers.
Unfortunately, publishers of financial newsletters
are not regulated by the SEC. Therefore, subscribers
might be caught unaware. Consider one news-
letter endorsed by a well-known personal finance
celebrity. A mutual fund managed by the same
company claimed a strong annual average return
from 2002 to 2011, but the fund was not started
until December 31, 2009. After questions arose, this
was said to be the result of a misunderstanding.
The same newsletter reported that in 2009, one
of the company’s portfolios outperformed the S&P
500, which was stated to have a return of 19.79
percent. The actual S&P return for that year, as
officially declared by Standard & Poor’s, was 26.46
percent. In fact, the newsletter understated the
performance of the S&P 500 in 9 of the 10 years
cited. Some of the company’s other newsletters
have made the claim “Ranked #1 & Recom-
mended by Hulbert Financial Digest!” The Digest,
however, does not make recommendations.2
Bottom line—investors must be particularly dil-
igent when evaluating the claims of investment
newsletters.
584 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
This calculation assumes that no funds were added to or withdrawn from the
portfolio during the measurement period. If intraperiod cash flows occur, the port-
folio return (Rp), will not be an accurate measure of the portfolio’s performance.
For example, if the client adds funds prior to the end of the measurement period,
use of Equation 22-1 would produce inaccurate results.
Money-weighted return Traditionally, portfolio measurement consisted of cal-
culating the money-weighted return (MWR), which is equivalent to the internal rate
of return (IRR) used commonly in financial applications. The MWR measures the
return earned on a beginning portfolio value and on any net contributions made
during the period.
The MWR equates the discounted value of all cash flows, including ending mar-
ket value, with the beginning value of the portfolio. Because the MWR is affected by
cash flows to and from the portfolio, it is inappropriate to use when making com-
parisons to other portfolios or to market indexes.
• The MWR measures the return to the portfolio owner; that is, it accurately measures
the investor’s return.
The MWR is a misleading measure of the manager’s ability if the manager does
not have control over the timing of the cash inflows and outflows. Clearly, if an
investor with $1,000,000 allocates these funds to a portfolio manager by providing
half at the beginning of the year and half at midyear, the portfolio value at the end
of the year will differ from another manager who received the entire $1,000,000 at
the beginning of the year. This is true even if both managers had the same two six-
month returns during that year.
Time-weighted return The time-weighted return (TWR) is unaffected by any cash
flows to the portfolio, and in most cases it most accurately reflects the return earned
by a portfolio manager.
• In order to evaluate a fund manager’s performance properly, we should use
the time-weighted return.
TWR reflects portfolio manager performance regardless of the size and timing of
the funds invested in the portfolio. Generally, portfolio managers have no control
over the deposits and withdrawals made by their clients. The time-weighted return
links together the subperiod returns during the evaluation period, assuming that
all income and realized gains are reinvested at each subperiod interval. The TWR
is generally annualized.
Money-Weighted Return
(MWR) Equates the
discounted value of cash
flows with the beginning
market value of the portfo-
lio; it reflects an investor’s
return
Time-Weighted Return
(TWR) Measures the
return earned by a fund
manager
A portfolio manager begins the year with $10,000.
Halfway through the year $2,000 is withdrawn by the
client. The value of the portfolio at the end of the year is $9,100. Clearly,
the portfolio manager did not decrease the value of the portfolio by $900.
Therefore, we cannot simply look at the beginning and ending values for
the portfolio. Instead, we must measure the return on the amount of money
invested during the period before the cash flow occurred and during the
period after.
EXAMPLE 22.2
Performance Measurement Issues 585
Which measure to use? The money-weighted return and the time-weighted
return can produce different results, as shown in Example 22.3. While the differ-
ence is quite small in the example, at times it can be substantial. The two measures
will produce identical results only in the case of no withdrawals or contributions
during the evaluation period and with all investment income reinvested.
• The time-weighted return is generally the appropriate measure for a portfolio
manager, whereas the money-weighted return captures the return for a port-
folio owner.
As we will see later in the chapter, the Global Investment Performance Standards
(GIPS®
), which is used by many money managers require that returns for most asset
classes be computed using the TWR approach.
Risk Considerations and Risk Measures
As stated earlier, we must consider risk when making judgments regarding relative
investment performance. The two prevalent measures of risk used in investment
analysis are total risk and nondiversifiable, or systematic, risk. Total risk is measured
by the standard deviation, and systematic risk—that part of total risk that cannot be
diversified away—is assessed by considering a portfolio’s beta. Differences in risk will
cause portfolios to respond differently to changes in the overall market and should
be accounted for in evaluating performance. We consider several risk measures in
this discussion. The first two are the same measures we have used throughout the
text, standard deviation and beta.
The standard deviation of a portfolio’s returns can be calculated easily with a
calculator or computer and is a measure of total risk. Recall that the beta for the
market as a whole is 1.0. For a large, diversified portfolio of domestic stocks, we
would typically expect the beta of the portfolio to be close to 1.0.
Assume a client provides a portfolio manager with
$500,000, which is invested at the beginning of the year.
At year end, the account is worth $545,000. At the beginning of year two, the
client provides the manager with an additional $55,000. At the end of year
two, the value of the portfolio is $630,000. How well did the manager perform;
that is, what is the time-weighted return?
During year one, the portfolio return is ($545,000 − $500,000) / $500,000,
or 9 percent. During year two, the portfolio return is ($630,000 − $600,000) /
$600,000, or 5 percent. The TWR for the two-year period = [(1.09)(1.05)] −
1.0 = 14.45 percent. Annualized, TWR = [(1.09)(1.05)]1/2 − 1 = (1.1445)1/2 − 1
= 1.0698 − 1.0 = 6.98 percent.
How did the client perform; that is, what is the money-weighted return?
Using a financial calculator, the entries would be as follows:
CF CF CF p0 2500 000 55 000 630 000 6 881, , , .; ; ; Compute IRR eercent.
EXAMPLE 22.3
In 2019, Fidelity’s Equity Income Fund had a beta of 0.95,
whereas T. Rowe Price’s Growth and Income Fund had a
beta of 0.88.
586 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
Beta can be calculated with any number of software programs. However, we must
remember that betas are only estimates of systematic risk. Betas can be calculated
using different time intervals, such as weekly, monthly, quarterly, or annual data,
and over different time periods, and each will produce a different estimate. Such
variations in the calculation could produce differences in rankings which rely on
beta. Furthermore, betas can be unstable, and they change over time.
Although not strictly a measure of risk, we can also consider a third measure that
directly relates to portfolio risk. This measure arises from the process of fitting a
characteristic line whereby the portfolio’s returns are regressed against the market’s
returns. The square of the correlation coefficient, called the coefficient of determi-
nation, or R 2
, is used to denote the portfolio’s degree of diversification.
• The coefficient of determination indicates the percentage of the variance in
the portfolio’s returns that is explained by variation in the market’s returns.
If the fund is totally diversified, the R2 will approach 1.0, indicating that the
fund’s returns are completely explained by the market’s returns. The lower the coef-
ficient of determination, the less the portfolio’s returns are attributable to the mar-
ket’s returns. This indicates that other factors, which could have been diversified
away, are being allowed to influence the portfolio’s returns.
The standard deviation, beta, and the coefficient of determination are readily
available for mutual funds from sources such as Morningstar.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Assume you have a portfolio to evaluate. When would you use the TWR? The
MWR?
2. Assume you own a portfolio that has an R 2 of 1.0 when measured against
the S&P 500. What would you conclude about the performance of this
portfolio?
Performance Benchmarks and Performance Universes
As noted earlier, the third question to be answered in measuring a portfolio’s per-
formance concerns the benchmark to use as a comparison. The two primary stand-
ards in use are performance universes and performance benchmarks.
What constitutes a good universe or benchmark for the evaluation of portfolio
performance? Characteristics that have been identified include the following:
• Unambiguous
• Specified in advance
• Appropriate
• Investable
• Measurable
Coefficient of Determina-
tion The square of the
correlation coefficient;
it measures the percent-
age of the variance in
the dependent variable
explained by variation in
the independent variable
In 2019, Fidelity’s Equity Income fund had an R 2 of 0.97,
whereas T. Rowe Price’s Growth and Income Fund had
an R 2 of 0.93.
EXAMPLE 22.5
Checking Your Understanding 587
As we will see in the following section, it can be difficult to find benchmarks that
meet these criteria.
Performance Universes
A performance universe is constructed by aggregating market valuations and income
accruals for a large number of portfolios that are managed individually. The data to
do this come from various portfolio managers such as bank trust departments, bro-
kerage firms, and investment advisory firms. A large universe allows subuniverses to
be constructed that in principle more closely match the portfolio being evaluated.
Problems can arise when using manager universes to evaluate portfolio perfor-
mance. First, they usually are broadly defined and therefore may not accurately reflect
the portfolio of a particular manager. Second, since they represent someone else’s
portfolios, they are not investable. Third, they are not specified in advance. Fourth,
manager universes are subject to survivorship bias, whereby the poor performing
managers may drop out (or be merged with other funds that are performing better).3
Performance Benchmarks
Unlike universes, performance benchmarks are unmanaged, passive portfolios that
reflect a manager’s investment style. They can be specified in advance—the S&P
500, Russell 3000, the Wilshire Index, and so forth. They are also unambiguous,
measurable, and investable. Ideally, a benchmark explains all of a manager’s returns
resulting from systematic factors such as market movements, as well as the man-
ager’s style involving factors such as the sectors chosen. This means that if the port-
folio performs above or below the benchmark, such performance can be attributed
to the manager’s security selection skill.
A potential problem is that except for portfolios holding large stocks such as
those found in the S&P 500, broad market indices may be too broad to reflect a
particular portfolio’s style. If a benchmark has this problem, we cannot be sure if
the manager outperformed (or underperformed) a benchmark because of skill (or
lack thereof) or because the benchmark did not adequately capture the manager’s
“style.” Even so-called style indices—designed to reflect a narrower segment of the
market—may not be appropriate for many portfolios. These style indices include
the Russell 1000 Growth and 1000 Value indices and the Russell 2000 Growth and
2000 Value indices. On the other hand, these style indices sometimes explain the
performance of a particular fund better than the typically cited market index.
Performance Universe
Constructed by aggregat-
ing market valuations
and income accruals for a
large number of port-
folios that are managed
individually
Performance Benchmarks
Unmanaged, passive
portfolios that reflect a
manager’s investment style
Russell/Mellon is a leading provider of investment
information services to more than 3,000 institutional
investors such as pension funds, asset managers, and consultants. This
company develops some 800 universes based on monitoring about 2,000
pension funds, 1,400 asset managers, and 75,000 portfolios. Russell/Mellon
also offers performance attribution services, allowing a client to analyze how
a return was achieved.
586 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
Beta can be calculated with any number of software programs. However, we must
remember that betas are only estimates of systematic risk. Betas can be calculated
using different time intervals, such as weekly, monthly, quarterly, or annual data,
and over different time periods, and each will produce a different estimate. Such
variations in the calculation could produce differences in rankings which rely on
beta. Furthermore, betas can be unstable, and they change over time.
Although not strictly a measure of risk, we can also consider a third measure that
directly relates to portfolio risk. This measure arises from the process of fitting a
characteristic line whereby the portfolio’s returns are regressed against the market’s
returns. The square of the correlation coefficient, called the coefficient of determi-
nation, or R 2
, is used to denote the portfolio’s degree of diversification.
• The coefficient of determination indicates the percentage of the variance in
the portfolio’s returns that is explained by variation in the market’s returns.
If the fund is totally diversified, the R2 will approach 1.0, indicating that the
fund’s returns are completely explained by the market’s returns. The lower the coef-
ficient of determination, the less the portfolio’s returns are attributable to the mar-
ket’s returns. This indicates that other factors, which could have been diversified
away, are being allowed to influence the portfolio’s returns.
The standard deviation, beta, and the coefficient of determination are readily
available for mutual funds from sources such as Morningstar.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Assume you have a portfolio to evaluate. When would you use the TWR? The
MWR?
2. Assume you own a portfolio that has an R 2 of 1.0 when measured against
the S&P 500. What would you conclude about the performance of this
portfolio?
Performance Benchmarks and Performance Universes
As noted earlier, the third question to be answered in measuring a portfolio’s per-
formance concerns the benchmark to use as a comparison. The two primary stand-
ards in use are performance universes and performance benchmarks.
What constitutes a good universe or benchmark for the evaluation of portfolio
performance? Characteristics that have been identified include the following:
• Unambiguous
• Specified in advance
• Appropriate
• Investable
• Measurable
Coefficient of Determina-
tion The square of the
correlation coefficient;
it measures the percent-
age of the variance in
the dependent variable
explained by variation in
the independent variable
In 2019, Fidelity’s Equity Income fund had an R 2 of 0.97,
whereas T. Rowe Price’s Growth and Income Fund had
an R 2 of 0.93.
EXAMPLE 22.5
Checking Your Understanding 587
As we will see in the following section, it can be difficult to find benchmarks that
meet these criteria.
Performance Universes
A performance universe is constructed by aggregating market valuations and income
accruals for a large number of portfolios that are managed individually. The data to
do this come from various portfolio managers such as bank trust departments, bro-
kerage firms, and investment advisory firms. A large universe allows subuniverses to
be constructed that in principle more closely match the portfolio being evaluated.
Problems can arise when using manager universes to evaluate portfolio perfor-
mance. First, they usually are broadly defined and therefore may not accurately reflect
the portfolio of a particular manager. Second, since they represent someone else’s
portfolios, they are not investable. Third, they are not specified in advance. Fourth,
manager universes are subject to survivorship bias, whereby the poor performing
managers may drop out (or be merged with other funds that are performing better).3
Performance Benchmarks
Unlike universes, performance benchmarks are unmanaged, passive portfolios that
reflect a manager’s investment style. They can be specified in advance—the S&P
500, Russell 3000, the Wilshire Index, and so forth. They are also unambiguous,
measurable, and investable. Ideally, a benchmark explains all of a manager’s returns
resulting from systematic factors such as market movements, as well as the man-
ager’s style involving factors such as the sectors chosen. This means that if the port-
folio performs above or below the benchmark, such performance can be attributed
to the manager’s security selection skill.
A potential problem is that except for portfolios holding large stocks such as
those found in the S&P 500, broad market indices may be too broad to reflect a
particular portfolio’s style. If a benchmark has this problem, we cannot be sure if
the manager outperformed (or underperformed) a benchmark because of skill (or
lack thereof) or because the benchmark did not adequately capture the manager’s
“style.” Even so-called style indices—designed to reflect a narrower segment of the
market—may not be appropriate for many portfolios. These style indices include
the Russell 1000 Growth and 1000 Value indices and the Russell 2000 Growth and
2000 Value indices. On the other hand, these style indices sometimes explain the
performance of a particular fund better than the typically cited market index.
Performance Universe
Constructed by aggregat-
ing market valuations
and income accruals for a
large number of port-
folios that are managed
individually
Performance Benchmarks
Unmanaged, passive
portfolios that reflect a
manager’s investment style
Russell/Mellon is a leading provider of investment
information services to more than 3,000 institutional
investors such as pension funds, asset managers, and consultants. This
company develops some 800 universes based on monitoring about 2,000
pension funds, 1,400 asset managers, and 75,000 portfolios. Russell/Mellon
also offers performance attribution services, allowing a client to analyze how
a return was achieved.
hapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
Jensen argued that the intercept term, alpha ( p), in Equation 22-4 offers a
means of identifying superior or inferior portfolio performance.5
R R Et t t t tp p p M pRF RF (22-4)
where
Rp the return on portfolio p in period
the risk-free
t
t
t
RF rate in period
the return on the market in periodM
t
ttR
EE
R
p
M
a random error term for portfolio p in periodt
t
t
RFtt tthe market risk premium during period
The CAPM asserts that equilibrium conditions should result in a zero intercept
term. Therefore, alpha should measure the contribution of the portfolio manager
since it represents the average incremental return per period beyond the return
attributable to the level of market risk assumed. Specifically,
1. If alpha is significantly positive, this is evidence of superior performance.
2. If alpha is significantly negative, this is evidence of inferior performance.
3. If alpha is insignificantly different from zero, this is evidence that the portfo-
lio manager matched the market on a risk-adjusted basis.
• Although the estimated alpha may be positive or negative, it may not be sig-
nificantly different (statistically) from zero. If it is not, we would conclude that
there was insufficient evidence to claim that manager performance differed
from the expected level.
• In practice, alphas often fail to meet the statistical significance test because of
the variability in security returns.6 This means that if a manager adds value, it
may not be detected statistically.
Superior and inferior portfolio performance can result from at least two sources.
First, the portfolio manager may be able to select undervalued securities consist-
ently enough to affect portfolio performance. Second, the manager may be able to
vary the portfolio’s composition in accordance with the rise and fall of the market.
Obviously, a manager with enough ability may be able to do both.
A computational advantage of the Jensen measure is that it permits the perfor-
mance measure to be estimated simultaneously with the beta for a portfolio. That
is, by estimating a characteristic line in risk premium form, estimates of both alpha
and beta are obtained at the same time. However, unlike the Sharpe and Treynor
measures, each period’s returns must be used in the estimating process, rather than
an average return for the entire period.
Information Ratio
The information ratio (IR) is calculated as the ratio of a portfolio’s average active
return to its active risk. Active return is derived as the difference between a portfo-
lio’s return and the benchmark return. Average or mean active return is commonly
5 This version is usually referred to as a characteristic line in risk premium or excess return form.
6 A general rule of thumb, for reasonably large samples, is that a coefficient should be twice its standard
error (i.e., the t-statistic should be 2 or greater) in order to be significant at the 5 percent level.
Checking Your Understanding 591
referenced as “alpha” and represents an alternative to Jensen’s measure of alpha.
The denominator of IR is active risk, which is typically referenced as tracking error
or tracking risk. IR is calculated as shown in Equation 22-5.
Information ratio
mean active return standard de
A p bR R R( )
vviation of active return
alpha tracking risk
(22-5)
where
RA the average of the return differences between portfilio p
and its benchmark
the standard deviatio
p b
p b
( )
( )
R R
R R nn of the return differences between
portfolio p and its bennchmark
An advantage of IR is that it offers a direct comparison of a manager’s perfor-
mance with that of the portfolio’s benchmark. The ratio considers both the extra
return earned relative to the benchmark and the additional risk assumed. Both the
numerator and the denominator should be approximately zero for an index fund.
M2
M2 or M 2 is named after its developers, Franco Modigliani and Leah Modigliani. It
is a return adjusted for volatility that allows returns between portfolios to be com-
pared. Since it is measured in percentage terms, it is easier to understand than the
Sharpe and Jensen measures, which are not intuitive.
Essentially, M2 equates the volatility of the portfolio whose performance is being
measured with the market. If portfolio risk is less than that of the market, leverage
can be used to increase the volatility. If portfolio risk is greater than market risk, part
of the funds can be placed in risk-free securities—to match the lower volatility of the
market. After adjusting portfolio risk so that it matches that of the market, or some
benchmark, the returns can be compared.
• A big advantage of M2 is that the results are stated in percentage form.
M2 is calculated as:
M R2 RF RFM p p( ) (22-6)
Assume that a large-cap value manager earned an average
active return relative to the Russell 1000 Value Index (the
benchmark) of 2.2 percent. Furthermore, assume that the manager’s tracking
risk relative to the benchmark was 5.8 percent.
The manager’s IR is
IR 2 2 5 8 0 38. . ./ .
Thus, we can see that the manager deviated considerably from the benchmark’s
holdings but was able to generate positive alpha in doing so.
592 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
where
M
p
standard deviation of the market
standard deviation off the portfolio being evaluated
the average return on tpR hhe portfolio
Sortino Ratio
The Sortino ratio (SR) differs from the other performance measures in that the
ratio considers only a portfolio’s downside risk. The measure is particularly useful
when evaluating portfolios or securities that do not have symmetric return distri-
butions. In the traditional performance measures, such as the Sharpe ratio, both
large negative and large positive returns contribute to a portfolio’s risk and thus
impact a security negatively. While large negative returns should be viewed nega-
tively, investors welcome large positive returns. The calculation for SR is presented
in Equation 22-7:
SR DDMAp p p( )R R (22-7)
where
SR p
p
Sortino ratio of portfolio p
average return of portfR oolio p during the evaluation period
minimum acceptableRMA return for the portfolio
downside deviation of portfopDD llio p during the evaluation period
Downside deviation is calculated using the same process as standard deviation
with the following exceptions: (1) the deviation is calculated relative to RMA , rather
than the average return, and (2) only those deviations that are negative are included
in the calculation.
The Sortino ratio is most useful when evaluating performance if portfolios or asset
classes have nonnormal return distributions. For example, analysts that are skilled
at generating periods with unusually large positive performance would be unfairly
penalized by traditional performance measures, but not by SR. Furthermore, com-
modity funds, private equity funds, and hedge funds are frequently identified as
having positively skewed return distributions, so SR may be more appropriate than
traditional measures when assessing the performance of these funds.
Assume a portfolio had a 14 percent average return over
a period of time, with a standard deviation of 23 percent.
The market for the same period had an average return of 10.5 percent, with
a standard deviation of 20 percent. The average risk-free rate was 5 percent.
M R2
5 20 23 9
12 83
RF RFM P P/ ( )
/
. %
The portfolio had better risk-adjusted performance than the market, 12.83 percent
versus 10.5 percent.
Checking Your Understanding 593
A comparison of risk-adjusted performance measures The Sharpe ratio,
which uses the standard deviation, evaluates portfolio performance on the basis of
both the portfolio’s return and its diversification. Although the Sharpe ratio ranks
portfolios, it does not tell us in percentage terms how much a fund outperformed
(or underperformed) some benchmark.
M2 produces a percentage return which can be easily understood. It produces
the same rankings as the Sharpe measure. Jensen’s alpha and the Treynor measure
use beta as the measure of risk.7
If a portfolio is completely diversified, all these measures will agree on a ranking
of portfolios. The reason for this is that with complete diversification, total vari-
ance is equal to systematic variance. When portfolios are not completely diversified,
the Treynor and Jensen measures can rank relatively undiversified portfolios much
higher than the Sharpe measure. Since the Sharpe measure uses total risk, both sys-
tematic and nonsystematic components are included. Finally, if a portfolio is known
to have a return distribution that is not symmetric, the Sortino ratio may be a more
appropriate measure of performance.
To demonstrate the use of the six measures of risk-adjusted performance dis-
cussed previously, the returns for two highly regarded investment funds are evalu-
ated. Specifically, the performances of portfolios affiliated with Warren Buffett and
Carl Icahn, arguably, two of the greatest investors of all time, are evaluated over
the period starting in 2000. Carl Icahn and his affiliates control Icahn Enterprises
(IEP ticker), which has stakes in firms across a diverse array of industries. Berkshire
Hathaway (BRK ticker) is the holding company controlled by Warren Buffett, and
like IEP, it has ownership interests in firms operating in a diverse array of businesses.
As a preliminary look at performance, Table 22.1 reports general return and risk
measures for the two funds, along with the S&P 500. In evaluating the performance
of the two funds, the S&P 500 is used as the benchmark for each. Given the diverse
holdings of the two funds and their relative lack of constraints on holdings, the S&P
500 is considered a valid gauge of investment performance for each.
The average return values reported in Table 22.1 indicate that the lofty reputa-
tions of the two investors are well-deserved as each beat the market (S&P 500) by
a wide margin over the period. BRK’s return nearly doubled the market return,
whereas IEP almost quadrupled the market’s return. The risk data indicate that
IEP, relative to BRK, generated its return by taking on substantially more total risk
(standard deviation) and systematic risk (beta). Thus, it appears the investment
strategies of the two diverged considerably as BRK was much more conservative rela-
tive to IEP; however, both were able to deliver superior returns.
Return and Risk Data for IEP, BRK and S&P 500, 2000–2018
Portfolio/
Fund
Average
Return (%)
Standard
Deviation (%) Beta
Active
Risk (%) R 2 (%)
IEP 21.49 38.87 0.91 36.56 11.55
BRK 10.55 17.32 0.53 16.96 19.85
S&P 500 5.82 14.54 1.00 NA 100.00
TABLE 22.1
7 Jensen’s alpha divided by beta is equivalent to Treynor’s measure minus the average risk premium for
the market portfolio for the period.
594 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
The risk measures in the last two columns require additional explanation. Active
risk is derived as the standard deviation of active returns. Where active return is the
difference between fund return and the return on the benchmark (in this case the
S&P 500). Active risk is also commonly referenced as tracking risk or tracking error.
Active risk standard deviation of the values p Bench( , ,R Rt t )) (22-8)
R
R
p
Bench
the return on portfolio p for period
the return
,
,
t
t
t
on the benchmark for period t
Like the other risk measures, active risk is shown to be considerably higher for
IEP relative to BRK.
Active risk indicates the degree to which a portfolio’s returns deviate from the
benchmark’s returns. A related measure is active share, which indicates the degree
to which a portfolio’s holdings deviate from the holdings of the benchmark. These
two measures tend to be directly related in that a portfolio with greater active risk
tends to also have greater active share. A major difference exists between the two;
however, in that active risk depends on the correlation of portfolio and benchmark
returns, whereas active share depends only on how common the holdings are across
the portfolio and the benchmark. An index fund will have a very low value for active
risk and for active share since its objective is to track its benchmark.
R-squared indicates the percentage of variation in a fund’s return that is explained
by variation in the market return. This measure is included in the output from a
regression where portfolio return is the dependent variable and benchmark return
is the independent variable. The R-squared values indicate that 11.55 percent of
the movements in IEP’s return can be attributed to movements in the market,
whereas the comparable number for BRK is 19.85 percent. Together, active risk and
Active Risk A measure of
the deviation of a port-
folio’s return from the
benchmark’s return
Active Share A measure of
the deviation of a port-
folio’s holdings from the
benchmark’s holdings
Let’s assume a portfolio manager is looking to add
either Security A or Security B to her portfolio. Neither
security is in the portfolio; however, both are in the portfolio’s value-weighted
benchmark. Further, both Security A and Security B have comparable market
caps and standard deviation of returns. Security A, however, has a correlation
of 0.60 with the benchmark and Security B has a correlation of 0.20 with the
benchmark. What effect will the choice have on the portfolio’s active risk,
active share and total risk?
Choosing Security A, instead of Security B, will result in lower active risk, no
difference in active share and higher total risk. Why?
Active risk is lower because Security A has a higher correlation with the
benchmark, which means the returns align more closely with (deviate less
from) the benchmark returns.
Active share is not impacted by the choice because the two are both included
in the benchmark and are of comparable size. Therefore, adding either one
results in the same increase in alignment of the portfolio holdings with that
of the benchmark.
The choice of Security A, instead of Security B, results in higher total risk
because of a poorer diversification result. As we learned in Chapter 7, more
total risk reduction is achieved by adding a security with lower correlation.
Checking Your Understanding 595
R2 indicate that neither fund tracks the market very closely; however, relative to IEP,
movements in BRK’s returns align more closely with the market.
If one were ranking the funds based on risk-adjusted performance, the values
in Table 22.2 indicate that IEP would get the nod over BRK. However, the invest-
ment acumen of Buffett and Icahn is clearly documented as both funds show far
superior performance relative to the S&P 500. The Sharpe, Treynor, and Sortino
ratios all confirm the exceptional outperformance of each of the funds relative to
the market.
Note that the Sharpe ratios for IEP and BRK are quite similar, which indicates
that when total risk is considered IEP does not fare as well as when only systematic
or active risk is counted. In other words, IEP shows especially superior performance
based on Jensen’s alpha, the Treynor ratio, and the information ratio. Remember
that systematic risk is the basis for the Treynor ratio and Jensen’s alpha, whereas the
information ratio relies on active risk.
Interestingly, only the Sortino ratio indicates that BRK produced superior perfor-
mance relative to IEP. Previous researchers have noted that Berkshire’s investment
strategy tends to produce a positively skewed return distribution.8
That is, when extreme returns occur, they tend to be large positive returns more
frequently than large negative returns. Obviously, investors do not like extreme
returns, unless they are positive. As noted previously, the traditional risk measures
do not differentiate between large negative versus large positive returns, and there-
fore, investors adept at generating extreme positive returns are penalized by tradi-
tional risk measures.
Overall, the performance data reported in Table 22.2 supports the use of sev-
eral alternative measures when gauging investment performance. The dispersion in
measures indicates that a fund manager may be unfairly rewarded, or penalized, if
one relies on a single performance measure or a group of performance measures
that rely on similar risk attributes.
Checking Your Understanding
4. Assume you examine five completely diversified portfolios. Will the Sharpe,
Treynor, and Jensen measures agree on how the managers should be ranked?
Why, or why not?
Risk-Adjusted Measures for IEP, BRK and S&P 500, 2000–2018
Portfolio/
Fund Sharpe Treynor
Jensen’s
Alpha (%)
Information
Ratio M2 (%)
Sortino
Ratio
IEP 0.48 0.20 15.95 0.43 9.81 0.97
BRK 0.45 0.15 6.14 0.28 9.31 1.04
S&P 500 0.21 0.03 NA NA NA 0.57
596 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
Measures of Downside Risk
There are several popular measures of downside risk that are used to assess fund
risk. These measures include downside deviation, maximum drawdown, downside
capture, and value at risk (VaR). The nonnormality of return distributions for alter-
native assets, hedge funds and derivatives, along with the financial crisis of 2008,
pushed market participants toward improving risk measurement approaches. As
a result, the downside risk measures have received increasing attention in recent
years.
Downside Deviation
Downside deviation indicates the risk associated with return observations that fall
below a minimum acceptable return (MAR). The basic idea behind downside devia-
tion is quite logical in that it assumes investors do not fret returns that fall sub-
stantially above their expectations. That is, investors do not complain that their
portfolio experienced an extreme positive return or worry that another big positive
move may be on the way. In contrast to downside deviation, standard deviation
treats extreme positive returns as causing the same level of consternation for inves-
tors, as extreme negative returns.
Downside deviation over a time period is derived as:
Downside deviation t
N
tR
N
1
2
0[min( , )],p MAR (22-9)
where [min( , )],R tp MAR 0 is zero if the portfolio return in period t is greater than
the minimum acceptable return (MAR); otherwise the value equals Rp,t – MAR, the
amount of fund under-performance.
Maximum Drawdown
Drawdown represents the percent difference between the maximum fund value
over a period and the subsequent minimum price. The maximum fund value is
commonly referenced as the high-water mark. This terminology is particularly com-
mon when discussing hedge funds. A fund’s drawdown is informative to investors as
it suggests, based on history, the amount of loss that should be considered possible
from a fund’s high-water mark. The drawdown period or months to recover is meas-
ured as the time period beginning from a fund declining from its high-water mark
until it reaches a subsequent new high.
Maximum drawdown is the largest drawdown that is observed over a period. For
example, in extending the prior evaluation of BRK, IEP, and the S&P 500, the maxi-
mum drawdown, based on annual periods, occurred in 2008 for all three portfolios.
In 2008, the drawdown for the S&P 500 was –48.14 percent. BRK fared slightly bet-
ter with a drawdown of –45.36 percent, whereas IEP performed much worse as it
experienced a drawdown of –84.46 percent. The 2008 financial crisis devastated the
financial markets, and as a result, the drawdown period extended for a substantial
time as it took the funds years to recover to the highs they had reached in 2007.
Downside Deviation Meas-
ures the risk associated
with return observations
falling below the mini-
mum acceptable return
(MAR)
Drawdown The percent
difference between the
maximum fund value and
subsequent minimum
value
Maximum Drawdown The
largest drawdown a fund
experienced over a period
of time
Measures of Downside Risk 597
Downside Capture
Downside capture is an indicator of how well a fund preserves value when the mar-
ket declines. The measure is derived by dividing the cumulative fund return by the
cumulative benchmark return during the period of market decline. A relatively low
downside capture value indicates that the fund has effectively preserved value, that
is, it has captured little of the downside market move.
A contrasting measure, upside capture, applies the same approach to periods of
up-market moves. Upside capture indicates a fund’s ability to match upward market
movements. A lower value indicates the fund is less effective in matching up-market
moves.
A value of 100 percent for downside and upside capture means the fund matches
the market’s performance exactly on the upside and downside. In 2018, the market
advanced by 11.41 percent in April through September and BRK had an upside cap-
ture of 64.28 percent, whereas IEP’s upside capture over this period was 263.40 per-
cent. In contrast, the market declined by 13.52 percent over the last three months of
2018 and the downside capture measures for BRK and IEP were 34.30 percent and
127.48 percent, respectively.
Value at Risk (VaR)
Value at risk (VaR) represents the loss expected to be exceeded with a given level of
probability over a stated time period. It is important to recognize that VaR is not a
measure of the maximum potential loss, rather, it is the minimum loss one should
expect with a small probability. For example, for a $60 million portfolio, the 5 per-
cent quarterly VaR for the portfolio may be identified as $7 million. This means that
the investor should expect a 5 percent chance of the portfolio incurring a quarterly
loss of at least $7 million.
VaR has become a standard risk management tool in the investment industry, so
it is imperative to have some understanding of the tool. VaR is commonly referenced
in currency value; however, it is sometimes identified as a percent. To apply VaR, the
user must select three inputs: the time period, the probability level, and the approach.
The time period selected for VaR ranges from one day (preferred by investment
banks, security dealers and hedge funds) to one year for companies that report
the measure in concert with their annual report. The shorter the time period, the
smaller the expected loss will be, thus in the above example, the quarterly VaR of
$7 million would be reduced considerably if the VaR period was reduced to express
the expected one-day loss.
The probability level is typically 1 percent or 5 percent. A lower probability cor-
responds with a more extreme loss event, and thus, is associated with a greater VaR
value. In the above example, the 5 percent quarterly VaR value was $7 million,
whereas a 1 percent probability would produce a significantly greater VaR value.
There are three prominent methods that are used in deriving VaR: the histori-
cal approach, the variance–covariance approach, and the Monte Carlo simulation
approach. Each approach allows for modifications to the general method to meet
the user’s situation.
The historical method is relatively easy to apply and interpret. Under the
approach, historical returns of the specified time interval are ranked and the return
corresponding to the 1 percentile (5 percentile) value is identified as the 1 percent
(5 percent) VaR.
598 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
The variance–covariance approach requires the user to input expected returns,
variances, and correlations for securities and use these to produce a portfolio return
distribution. By assuming normality for the return distribution, the VaR can be eas-
ily extracted from the created distribution.
The simulation approach is the most complicated method of the three alter-
natives. The method is frequently necessary to deal with portfolios comprised of
complex securities, such as portfolios with large derivative positions. This approach
requires the user to identify return distributions for the various underlying asset
classes contained in the portfolio. The simulation produces numerous different
outcomes, which are ranked and the value corresponding to the lowest 1 percentile,
or 5 percentile, value is identified as the VaR.
A Comparison of VaR Approaches VaR has become a standard tool within the
investment management industry; however, users must understand its limitations.
The tool is intended to be used in concert with other risk management methods,
not as the sole risk management application. A common criticism of VaR is that all
three calculation approaches rely strongly on past return performance.
The historical approach relies exclusively on past return performance; however,
the inputs for the other approaches are also likely to be largely based on histori-
cal observations. The variance–covariance approach is criticized for its reliance on
security returns being normally distributed, which is not a requirement of the other
two methods.
Style Analysis and Performance Attribution
Most of this chapter is concerned with how to measure a portfolio manager’s per-
formance. However, a complete evaluation of portfolio performance should also
include style analysis and performance attribution. Style analysis seeks to determine
the detailed investment style adopted by a money manager. Performance attribu-
tion analyzes the reasons why a manager did better or worse than a properly con-
structed benchmark; in effect, it seeks to determine why success or failure occurred.
Style Analysis
In Chapter 3, we considered Morningstar’s style box for mutual funds. A style box
classifies a fund into one of nine cells depending upon the market capitalization of
the portfolio’s stocks and whether they are growth or value stocks, or a blend. Such
a classification reflects a portfolio manager’s “style” characteristics. For example, a
manager who invests in small growth stocks would be classified at the intersection of
these two characteristics (small cap and growth) in the style box.
Figure 22.1 depicts a typical nine-cell style box that is used in classifying funds. The
“X” in the figure identifies the fund under consideration as a large-cap growth fund.
The style box does not explain all of a portfolio’s performance, however, as port-
folios differ from each other with regard to securities held and/or the proportion
of the portfolio invested in each security. For example, among equity funds, a fund
may describe itself as a large-cap growth fund and still show a performance that dif-
fers from other funds in the same category.
A portfolio manager constructs a portfolio based on his or her investment phi-
losophy, resulting in a unique portfolio. Style analysis seeks to identify the investing
style of a portfolio in terms of asset classes or equity styles.
Style Analysis A clas-
sification reflecting a
portfolio manager’s “style”
characteristics
Performance Attribu-
tion A part of portfolio
evaluation that seeks to
determine why success or
failure occurred
Style Analysis and Performance Attribution 599
There are two approaches to style analysis, holdings-based and returns-based:
• Holdings-based style analysis uses the stocks in a portfolio to describe a fund’s
allocation among asset classes or equity styles. As noted, Morningstar uses a
holdings-based approach to style analysis.
• Returns-based style analysis compares a portfolio’s return to the returns of a set
of market indexes, each of which tracks a specific investment style such as
large-cap growth or small-cap value.
Sharpe developed returns-based style analysis, which is a regression-based
approach. His analysis used multiple asset classes including T-bills, several bond
indexes, several stock indexes, and also a mortgage-related securities index. 9 He
divided equities into four mutually exclusive groups using the indexes devel-
oped: large-cap value stocks, large-cap growth stocks, mid-cap stocks, and small-
cap stocks. Returns-based style analysis typically requires at least 20–36 months
of returns data.
• Performing a returns-based style analysis involves evaluating the factors that
drive a portfolio’s actual return behavior, which makes it an objective method
for determining risk exposure.
Sharpe’s analysis can be used to produce a “style benchmark”, or customized
benchmark which reflects an individualized weighting of a set of indices that docu-
ment a manager’s style. Relative to a single-index benchmark, customized bench-
marks more accurately portray a manager’s investment style.
XLarge
Mid
Small
BlendValue Growth
FIGURE 22.1 Equity Style Box
Consider a mid-cap stock fund whose manager emphasizes
stocks that currently are out of favor. The manager believes
that recent events have caused these stocks to sell for less than their intrinsic
value. To identify these stocks, the manager screens the mid-cap database for
stocks with low price to book ratios and low P/E ratios. These value criteria
cause the portfolio to have a unique return behavior that relates directly to the
manager’s style. Such a style differs from other mid-cap fund managers who
emphasize growth when selecting stocks.
600 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
Consider a domestic large-cap equity fund manager
who gradually shifts more of the portfolio’s assets to
international stocks. Furthermore, the manager tends to inadvertently focus
on mid-cap stocks. A single index would be unlikely to capture the manager’s
portfolio drift, whereas a customized index could.
EXAMPLE 22.11
One problem with style analysis is style “consistency.” One estimate is that over
a five-year period, less than half the domestic mutual funds maintain their style
consistency. Standard & Poor’s conducted a study of consistency and found that
large-cap growth funds maintained a consistency level of about 70 percent over a
five-year period, whereas all large-cap funds had a consistency of 54 percent. Mid-
cap funds had a consistency of only 31 percent, and small-cap blend funds main-
tained a consistency of only 18 percent.
Performance Attribution
The purpose of performance attribution is to decompose portfolio performance into
components that can be associated with decisions made by the portfolio manager.
Typically, performance attribution is a top-down approach; it looks first at the
broad issues and progresses by narrowing the investigation. It often begins with the
investment policy statement (IPS), which guides the management of the portfolio.
The portfolio normally has established a set of portfolio weights, a strategic alloca-
tion. If the manager uses a different allocation, this will account for some of the
portfolio results.
After this analysis, performance attribution frequently assesses sector selection and
security selection. Did the manager concentrate on, or avoid, certain sectors, and if
so, what were the results? Was the manager successful in selecting individual stocks?
Part of this process involves identifying a benchmark of performance (bogey) to
use in comparing the portfolio’s results. This bogey is designed to measure passive
results. Any differences between the portfolio’s results and the bogey must be attrib-
utable to the manager’s asset allocation and security selection decisions.
Performance attribution recognizes that performance that deviates from the
benchmark comes from two possible sources:
1. Asset allocation
2. Security selection
Techniques are available to decompose the performance of a portfolio into these
two components.10
Money Managers and Performance
Presentations
Up until the early 1990s, investment managers had great freedom in presenting
their performance results to the public. This generated considerable confusion
when investors tried to compare results among money managers. Naturally, money
managers tried to put the best light on their performance, knowing that their success
10 Roy Henriksson, “Market Timing and Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal
of Business (1984): 73–96.
An Overview on Performance Evaluation 601
in attracting money, and possibly even their jobs, depended on their performance.
Is it any wonder that misrepresentations of portfolio performance were common?
In order to “level the playing field” in performance presentations among firms
competing globally and to aid investors in making comparisons among global firms,
CFA Institute created the Global Investment Performance Standards (GIPS)®. The
objective of GIPS is to obtain global acceptance of a standard for fair and com-
plete presentation of performance and ensure accuracy and consistency of data in
recordkeeping, marketing, and presentation. Its introduction recognized the fact
that investment management is increasingly a global industry.
GIPS promotes five guiding ethical principles as objectives:
1. To establish investment industry best practices for calculating and presenting
investment performance that promote investor interests and instill investor
confidence
2. To provide a global, single standard for the calculation and presentation of
investment performance based on the principles of fair representation and
full disclosure
3. To promote the use of accurate and consistent investment performance data
4. To promote fair, global competition among investment firms without creating
barriers to entry
5. To foster industry self-regulation on a global basis
GIPS requirements include the following:
• Uniformity in performance calculations and disclosures
• Inclusion of all actual fee-paying discretionary portfolios with other portfolios
that have a similar objective
• Compliant history for at least five years to start, or since inception if less than
five years; after this original requirement is met, the firm must build toward a
minimum 10-year record of reported performance
• Compliance to GIPS must be firmwide
Checking Your Understanding
5. Assume you are the manager of an investment management firm that has a
good performance record that is fairly presented to clients. Will the introduc-
tion of GIPS improve the performance results of your firm? If not, how will its
introduction help you as a firm?
An Overview on Performance Evaluation
Investors are often inattentive when making comparisons of portfolios over various
time periods. One popular press article summarized the extent of the problem by
noting that “most investors . . . don’t have the slightest idea how well their portfolios
are actually performing.” Even when investors are aware of their portfolio’s perfor-
mance, they should understand that in today’s investment world of computers and
databases, exact, precise universally agreed-upon methods of portfolio evaluation
remain an elusive goal.
As we have seen, investors can use several well-known techniques to assess the
actual performance of a portfolio relative to one or more alternatives. In the final
analysis, when investors are selecting money managers, they evaluate these manag-
ers on the basis of their published performance statistics. If the published “track
602 Chapter 22 Evaluation of Investment Performance
record” looks good, that is typically enough to convince many investors to invest in
a particular mutual fund. However, the past is no guarantee of an investment man-
ager’s future. Short-term results may be particularly misleading.
Finally, note that a long evaluation period is needed to successfully determine
performance that is truly superior. Over short periods, luck can overshadow all else,
but luck cannot be expected to continue unabated.
Summary
• Evaluation of portfolio performance, the bottom line of the investing process,
is important for all investors and money managers.
• The framework for evaluating portfolio performance consists of measuring
return and risk, determining an appropriate benchmark to compare against
portfolio performance, and recognizing any constraints that the portfolio
manager faces.
• Time-weighted, as opposed to money-weighted, return most accurately reflects
a manager’s performance when the manager does not control the flow of
funds into and out of the portfolio.
• The two prevalent measures of risk are total risk (standard deviation) and
systematic risk (beta).
• The coefficient of determination, or R2
, and tracking risk can be used to
denote a portfolio’s degree of diversification.
• Risk-adjusted (composite) measures of portfolio performance combine return
and risk together in one calculation.
• The Sharpe, Treynor, and information ratio can be used to rank portfolio
performance. Jensen’s measure is an absolute measure of performance. M2 is
a variant of the Sharpe measure. The Sortino ratio is useful when evaluating
portfolios with nonnormal return distributions.
• Both the Sharpe and Treynor measures relate portfolio excess return to a risk
measure. Sharpe uses standard deviation, whereas Treynor uses beta. Portfolio
rankings from the two measures can differ if portfolios are not well diversified.
• Jensen’s alpha measures the difference between what the portfolio was
expected to earn, given its systematic risk, and what it actually earned.
• By regressing a portfolio’s excess return against that of the market index, Jensen’s
alpha captures the superior or inferior performance of the portfolio manager.
• Based on capital market theory, alphas are expected to be zero. Significant
positive alphas are difficult to attain.
• M2 gives rankings identical to the Sharpe measure but states results in per-
centage terms.
• A good universe or benchmark for evaluating portfolio performance should be
unambiguous, specified in advance, appropriate, investable, and measurable.
• Active risk and active share are risk measures that indicate the degree to which
a fund’s returns and holdings, respectively, deviate from the benchmark.
• Downside risk measures include: drawdown, value at risk (VaR), downside
deviation, and downside capture. These measures are useful for investors in
determining the potential losses they face.
• VaR has three general methods of calculation: historical, variance–covariance,
and simulation.
• VaR indicates the minimum loss a fund manager should expect to incur if an
infrequent negative event occurs.
• Style analysis seeks to identify the characteristics of a portfolio.
Questions 603
• Sharpe developed returns-based style analysis using an asset class factor model
(think of it as similar to a regression model).
• Performance attribution identifies why a portfolio manager did better or
worse than an expected benchmark. It involves decomposing performance to
determine why the particular results occurred.
• CFA Institute created GIPS® as a way to obtain global acceptance of a standard
for fair presentation of performance results by investment management firms.