370CHAPTER 14
As you prepare to invest your inher-
itance, you should consider some
basic information about sectors
and industries. You have already
learned that you must think ahead
when you invest. Yesterday’s top
performers are unlikely to be
tomorrow’s top performers. For
example, the utility sector was one
of the worst-performing sectors in
2017 but turned in one of the best
sector performances for 2018. In
contrast, manufacturing excelled
in 2017 but performed poorly in
2018. Many analysts attribute the
reversal in relative performance
from 2017 to 2018 to the new tax bill and the reduction in regulation enacted in
2017, versus the fears of higher interest rates and trade uncertainty that dominated
the headlines in 2018.
You cannot become proficient in analyzing sectors and industries unless you
devote substantial time and effort to the task; however, learning the basics of such
an analysis is certainly beneficial for the management of a portfolio. Following the
recession of 2008–2009, dramatic changes in regulation and industry structure were
put in place for both the financial services sector and the healthcare sector. Over
the subsequent five-year period, the healthcare sector was the top performer of
all sectors, whereas the financial services sector was one of the worst-performing
sectors.1 An analysis of the changes in these sectors may have alerted you to these
results. Likewise, the continuing integration of technology into almost every facet of
an individual’s daily life has made the technology sector one of the top performing
sectors since the beginning of the 21st century.
It is clear that being familiar with current conditions and expected developments
in the major sectors of the economy is crucial to overall investing success. Both
short- and long-term portfolio performance are dependent on selecting sectors
with the best earnings and growth prospects.
Sector/Industry Analysis
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Assess the significance of sector/
industry analysis in the top-down
approach to security analysis.
• Explain how industries are classified
and the stages that industries go
through over time.
• Describe how to conduct and
use sector/industry analysis as an
investor.
Introduction
The second step in the fundamental analysis of common stocks is sector/industry
analysis. Several studies suggest the industry factor continues to gain prominence.2
For example, the strongest trading patterns for institutions appear to be based on
the sector dimension.
Investors sometimes speak about industries and sometimes about sectors. In gen-
eral, a sector is a broader definition and can include several different industries. An
industry, in turn, can include several different subindustries.
• For organizational purposes, think of going from sectors to industries to
subindustries.
An investor who is convinced that the economy and the market offer favorable
conditions for investing should proceed to consider those sectors that promise the
most opportunities in the coming years. In the next few years of the 21st century,
for example, investors will not view some U.S. industries with the same enthusiasm
they would have even ten years earlier—laptop computers being a good example.
On the other hand, it is highly likely that industries such as medical services, social
media, and telecom services will continue to have an impact on most Americans for
years to come.
The analysis of industries as performed by professional security analysts is typi-
cally quite tedious. Numerous factors are involved, including multiple demand and
supply factors, a detailed analysis of price factors, labor issues, government regula-
tion, and so forth. To do such analysis successfully requires experience, access to
information, and hard work. Such analysis is not practical for us to consider here.
Instead, we concentrate on the justification for sector/industry analysis and on the
conceptual issues involved.
The basic concepts of industry analysis are closely related to our previous dis-
cussion of valuation principles. Investors can apply these concepts in several ways,
depending on the degree of rigor sought, the amount of information available,
and the end objective. What we seek to accomplish here is to learn to think ana-
lytically about industries and sectors. Investors can benefit from a reasonable and
thoughtful approach to sector/industry analysis without getting involved in myr-
iad details.
Consider the medical appliances and equipment
industry. Intuitive Surgical, Inc. (ISRG) pioneered a
robotic surgery machine that revolutionized certain surgical procedures
by making possible only minor incisions in the patient and therefore
very rapid recovery from surgery. The price of the stock soared and, in
late 2018 reached over $550 per share. Furthermore, investors believed the
company offered plenty of opportunities for future growth as it traded with
a P/E of 56.
EXAMPLE 14.1
2 See, for example, Stefano Cavaglia, Jeffrey Diermeier, Vadim Moroz, and Sonia de Zordo, “Investing in
Global Equities,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 30 (Spring 2004): 88–94.
372 Chapter 14 Sector/Industry Analysis
What Is an Industry?
At first glance, the term industry may seem self-explanatory. At its most basic, an
industry consists of a group of companies primarily engaged in producing or han-
dling the same products or in rendering the same services. Everyone is familiar with
the auto industry, the pharmaceutical industry, and the electric utility industry. But
are these classifications as clear-cut as they seem? Apparently not, because while we
have had industry classification schemes for many years, the classification systems
continue to evolve. Furthermore, investment advisory services and popular press
sources use different classification systems.
Classifying Industries
For more than 60 years, the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system was
used to classify firms into industries.3
SIC codes brought order to the industry classification problem by providing
a consistent basis for describing industries and companies in as broad, or as spe-
cific, a manner as desired. Nevertheless, the SIC system was criticized for not
being able to handle changes in the U.S. economy. This led to the development
of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), which replaced
SIC codes in 1997.
The NAICS Classification System
The North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) is a significant change
for classifying economic activities. It was developed using a production-oriented
conceptual framework; whereby, companies are classified into industries based on
the activity in which they are primarily engaged. Basically, companies that do similar
things in similar ways are classified together.
NAICS uses a six-digit hierarchical coding system to classify all economic
activity into 20 sectors, which provides greater flexibility relative to SIC codes.
Fifteen of these sectors are devoted to services-producing sectors compared
to five sectors that are mainly goods-producing sectors. NAICS identifies 1,170
industries. NAICS is the standard used by federal statistical agencies to classify
businesses.
Standard Industrial Clas-
sification (SIC) system A
classification of firms on
the basis of what they pro-
duce using census data
North American Industry
Classification System
(NAICS) A company clas-
sification system that uses
a production- oriented
conceptual framework
Consider General Electric (GE), a classic industrial
company that has been in business for more than 100
years. Today it is well known for making CT scanners, jet engines, locomotives,
gas turbines, appliances, and light bulbs. GE obtains the majority of its
revenue from the industrial sector (55%); however, it obtains significant
revenues from three other sectors, energy (22%), health care (16%), and
financials (7%).
EXAMPLE 14.2
3 Developed in the 1930s when manufacturing dominated the U.S. economy, this system was revised many
times because of rapid changes in our economy, particularly the expansion of services.
The Importance of Sector/Industry Analysis 373
Other Industry Classifications
In the money management field, several well-known investment advisory companies
have developed their own industry groupings. Since March 2002, Standard & Poor’s
Corporation has provided the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) in
order to provide “one complete, continuous set of global sector and industry defini-
tions.” This system divides everything into 11 “economic sectors”: consumer discre-
tionary, consumer staples, energy, financials, health care, industrials, information
technology, materials, communication services, real estate, and utilities. Within this
framework, there are 24 industry groupings, 68 industries, and 157 subindustries.
This system is intended to classify companies around the world and already includes
more than 43,000 companies. S&P’s GICS system was developed jointly with Morgan
Stanley Capital International (MSCI) to facilitate the creation and customization of
portfolios and indexes.
The Value Line Investment Survey covers roughly 1,700 companies, divided into
approximately 98 industries, with a discussion of industry prospects preceding the
company analysis. Value Line’s industry classifications can be quite useful to investors
because Value Line ranks their expected performance for the year ahead.
The Importance of Sector/Industry Analysis
Why Sector/Industry Analysis Is Important
Over the Long Run
Sector and industry analysis is important to investor success because very significant
differences occur in the performance of industries and sectors. To see this, we exam-
ine the performance of 16 sectors over a long time period using sector price indexes.
Kenneth French makes available an extensive collection of financial data on his
website, including return data for several alternative industry/sector classifications.
We use his value-weighted sector return data to derive cumulative value indexes for
16 sectors and the S&P 500 for a 50-year plus time period. In constructing the cumu-
lative value indexes, we set the base index value at 100 for the starting period, 1960.
In effect, the value indexes reflect the wealth an investor would have accumulated
by each specified year from making a $100 investment in 1960 in the index.
Table 14.1 shows the cumulative wealth indexes for the 16 sectors and the S&P
500 for five selected year-ends, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2014. Based on the
table values, you can see that a $100 stock market (S&P 500) investment in 1960
would have grown to $18,024 by the end of 2014. The table values make it clear
that equity investors did extremely well during the decade of the 1980s and 1990s
as equities advanced by 3.6 times and 4.9 times, respectively, during these decades.
In contrast, during the first decade of the 21st century, equities only advanced by
1.15 times. This decade is commonly referenced as the “lost decade” for investment
performance.
Global Industry Classifica-
tion Standard (GICS)
Provides a complete, con-
tinuous set of global sector
and industry definitions
using 11 economic sectors
Using NAICS codes, the plastics product manufactur-
ing industry is coded 3261. Within this code are several
breakdowns, including, among others, plastic pipe and pipe fitting manufac-
turing (326122), and plastics bottle manufacturing (326160)
374 Chapter 14 Sector/Industry Analysis
Overall, there was tremendous variation in the full-period performance across
the sectors. The best performing sectors, food and drugs, accumulated values of
$70,724 and $66,847, respectively, from the initial $100 investment. In contrast, the
worst-performing sectors, steel and consumer durables, accumulated values of only
$1,533 and $7,472, respectively. Clearly choosing the right sectors for investment
made a tremendous difference in an investor’s final result.
In addition, to the variation in performance across sectors, there was also sub-
stantial variation in performance across time. For example, the mining sector per-
formed relatively poorly from 1960 through year 2000, then performed incredibly
well between 2000 and 2010, but experienced dismal performance again over the
final four years of the period. In contrast, the drug sector had phenomenal perfor-
mance during the 1990s, performed relatively poorly during the 2000s, but returned
to tremendous performance again over the final four years of the sample period.
Note that the financial crisis produced a net reduction in value for the finance sec-
tor during the 2000s, which was a unique result relative to any other sector for any
other decade.
The values reported in Table 14.1 make it clear that the asset allocation decision
across sectors is crucial. An investor that is proficient at choosing the best perform-
ing sectors at the appropriate times can greatly enhance portfolio performance.
Virtually, all sectors showed decades where performance shined and decades where
performance languished. Investors that are able to assess economic conditions and
forecast such patterns are richly rewarded for their skill.
Cumulative Value Indexes for Selected Sectors across Time
(1960 = 100)
Sector 1980 1990 2000 2010 2014
S&P 500 Index 493 1,796 8,857 10,158 18,024
Food 520 5,609 22,373 39,831 70,724
Mining and minerals 1,978 2,750 5,136 31,157 14,898
Oil and petroleum products 1,603 3,738 14,277 35,451 43,283
Apparel and footwear 541 2,449 6,569 17,195 36,221
Consumer durables 383 1,084 2,773 4,179 7,472
Chemicals 340 1,180 3,873 9,306 14,370
Drugs, soap, perfumes, and tobacco 587 4,091 25,209 30,853 66,847
Construction and building materials 401 1,157 5,430 7,644 17,599
Steelworks 264 400 1,312 1,549 1,533
Fabricated products 773 1,809 4,425 12,579 21,934
Machinery and business equipment 613 1,113 8,772 9,432 15,654
Automobiles 347 1,178 4,557 7,354 11,495
Transportation 592 1,616 7,016 13,756 28,967
Utilities 434 1,900 6,660 10,953 19,705
Retail stores 413 2,653 11,463 19,987 37,688
Banks, insurers, and other financials 569 1,770 15,888 14,274 25,387
Source: Values were derived from data obtained from the Kenneth French website
Checking Your Understanding 375
The lesson to be learned from Table 14.1 is simple.
• Sector/industry analysis pays because sectors perform very differently over
time and portfolio performance is significantly affected by the particular sec-
tors represented in investor portfolios.
Finally, let’s note that Warren Buffett, arguably the best-known investor in the
United States, seeks to identify “excellent” businesses based in part on the prospects
for the industry.
Checking Your Understanding
1. How important is sector/industry analysis to investors?
2. What has been the major change in the U.S. economy in the last 30 or 40
years as far as sectors are concerned?
Sector Performance Over Shorter Periods
What about shorter periods of time and recent data? Does the same principle hold
true—that sectors perform very differently?
Table 14.2 shows performance for the S&P 500 and the same 16 sectors over a
recent seven-year period that includes the recession of 2008 and the subsequent
market rebound.
Average Annual Sector Returns for 2008–2014
Sector Average Return (%)
S&P 500 Index 9.69
Food 11.23
Mining and minerals 0.92
Oil and petroleum products 3.27
Apparel and footwear 19.54
Consumer durables 14.70
Chemicals 14.69
Drugs, soap, perfumes, and tobacco 14.27
Construction and building materials 15.74
Steelworks −1.54
Fabricated products 12.93
Machinery and business equipment 13.07
Automobiles 18.78
Transportation 14.98
Utilities 8.33
Retail stores 13.63
Banks, insurers, and other financials 7.03
Source: Values were derived from data obtained from the Kenneth French website.
TABLE 14.2
376 Chapter 14 Sector/Industry Analysis
The recent performance shows incredible variation across the sectors, with the
minimum average return of −1.54 percent for the steel sector and the maximum
average return of 19.54 percent for the apparel sector. Investors with portfolios
concentrated in firms from the steel, mining, oil, and finance sectors would have
been greatly disappointed by the performance of their equity portfolios during this
seven-year period. In stark contrast, investors with heavy allocations to the apparel,
autos, construction, and transportation sector would have been elated with their
stock portfolio performance during these years.
In analyzing the data in Tables 14.1 and 14.2, it is clear that short-term perfor-
mance frequently deviates from long-term performance. Some of the best long-
term performers were poor performers during recent times, and similarly, some of
the worst long-term performers showed strong recent performance. Interestingly,
there are a few sectors that stand out for their consistency of performance. For
example, the steel and consumer durables sectors performed poorly and did so on a
pretty consistent basis. In contrast, the food and drugs sectors were “winners” pretty
consistently across the long term and short term; however, it took a while for them
to get started as prior to the 1980s their performance was about average.
To be successful at sector analysis, an investor has to be able to identify crucial
economic and sector-specific factors and then answer a number of relevant ques-
tions. Relevant questions include: What factors will allow firms within the sec-
tor to maintain or expand their profitability? Are there forthcoming changes in
economic/sector conditions that are going to erode future profitability of the firms
within the sector? Are there economic or sector forces that will prevent the sector
from ever generating strong profits?
How One Industry Can Have a Major Impact
on Investors: The Telecom Industry
Let’s consider an example of an industry moving into and out of favor with inves-
tors in a very dramatic manner. The telecommunications sector was one of the great
growth stories of the late 1990s. Telecom was deregulated in 1996. Predictions of
how quickly internet traffic would grow proliferated. One of the major contributing
factors to what happened to the telecom industry is the huge amount of money that
poured into the industry. When stock prices were rising rapidly in the late 1990s, it
was easy for the industry to raise large amounts of capital by borrowing.
Figure 14.1 shows the tremendous increase in the telecom index in 1998 and
1999. Many of the companies in this industry were market favorites, such as Global
Crossing, WorldCom, and Qwest.
Amazingly, after only a few years, investors realized that the need for communica-
tions and bandwidth services could not grow at the rates that had been predicted.
Meanwhile, the crushing debt loads these companies had assumed caught up with
them when the recession hit in 2001. Telecom collapsed and, in all likelihood, was
the greatest bursting of a bubble in one sector in history. One estimate is that inves-
tors in the telecommunications industry lost $2 trillion by mid-2002.
Figure 14.1 tells the rest of the story, and it is ugly. The downward spiral of tel-
ecom companies seemed to be nonstop, with numerous bankruptcies along the way.
Just as the industry began to recover in 2006 and 2007, it was hit again by the 2008
financial crisis.
The industry gradually recovered over the years from 2010 through 2014. How-
ever, once again, the industry experienced sharp losses in the post-2014 period
Analyzing Sectors/Industries 377
due to competition from over-the-top (OTT) voice applications, such as Skype,
WhatsApp, and Lync. Overall, investors in the Telecom industry over this extended
period ended approximately where they started. A long-term investment in the Tel-
ecom industry turned out to be “dead money.”
Analyzing Sectors/Industries
Sectors and industries are analyzed through the study of a wide range of data,
including sales, earnings, dividends, capital structure, product lines, regulations,
innovations, and so on. Such analysis requires considerable expertise and is usually
performed by industry analysts employed by brokerage firms and other institutional
investors.
A useful first step is to classify industries by their stage in the life cycle. The
idea is to assess the general health and current position of the industry. A second
step involves a qualitative analysis of industry characteristics designed to assist inves-
tors in assessing the future prospects for an industry. Each of these steps is exam-
ined in turn.
The Industry Life Cycle
Many observers believe that industries evolve through at least four stages: the pio-
neering stage, the expansion stage, the stabilization stage, and the deceleration in
growth and/or decline stage. There is an obvious parallel in this idea to human
development. The concept of an industry life cycle could apply to industries
or product lines within industries. The industry life cycle concept is depicted in
Figure 14.2, and each stage is discussed in the following section.
Pioneering stage In the pioneering stage, rapid growth in demand occurs.
Although a number of companies will fail at this stage because they will not survive
the competitive pressures, most experience rapid growth in sales and earnings. The
opportunities available attract a number of companies, as well as venture capital.
378 Chapter 14 Sector/Industry Analysis
Considerable jockeying for position occurs as the companies battle each other for
survival, with the weaker firms failing and dropping out.
Investor risk in an unproven company is high, but so are expected returns if
the company succeeds. Profit margins and profits are often small or negative. In
the pioneering stage, it is difficult to identify likely survivors, just when the ability
to identify the future strong performers is most valuable. By the time it becomes
apparent who the real winners are, their prices may have been bid up considerably
beyond what they were in the earlier stages of development.
As we approach the third decade in the 21st century, the legal marijuana indus-
try can be classified in the pioneering stage of development. The U.S. market for
legal marijuana in 2016 was less than $8 billion: however, the market is estimated to
reach about $150 billion by 2025. 4 That’s a compound annual growth of about 40
percent! Given the explosive growth prospects, the number of competitors operat-
ing in the market has increased exponentially. It is estimated that as of 2018 there
were approximately 25,000 cannabis businesses in the United States.
The largest competitor in the industry, Canopy Growth, had a market cap of
$15 billion in early 2019. Typical of a firm in the pioneering stage, its revenue
growth in 2018 was over 95 percent, however, its EBITDA margin was −79 percent.
As with any industry in its pioneering stage, many of the cannabis firms now in
operation will not exist in several years. Identifying the industry leaders early in the
life cycle, however, can be very lucrative. Canopy Growth’s stock sold for about $2
per share in early 2016 and traded in the mid-$40 range by early 2019.
Expansion stage In the expansion stage, the survivors from the pioneering stage
are identifiable. They continue to grow and to prosper, but the rate of growth is
more moderate than before.
At the expansion stage, industries are improving their products and perhaps
lowering their prices. They are more stable and solid, and at this stage, they often
attract considerable investment funds. Investors are more willing to invest in these
industries now that their potential has been demonstrated and the risk of failure
has decreased.
Financial policies become firmly established at this stage. The capital base is
widened and strengthened. Profit margins are very high. Firms often begin paying
Pioneering Expansion Stabilization Declining
Sales
Time
FIGURE 14.2 The industry life cycle
4 Information retrieved from, https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/legal-marijuana-
market.
Analyzing Sectors/Industries 379
dividends in this stage, which further enhances the attractiveness of the companies
to investors.
Stabilization stage Industries eventually evolve into the stabilization stage (some-
times referred to as the maturity stage), at which point the growth begins to mod-
erate. This is probably the longest part of the industry life cycle. Products become
more standardized and less innovative, the marketplace is full of competitors, and
costs are relatively stable. Management’s ability to control costs and produce oper-
ating efficiencies becomes very important in terms of affecting individual company
profit margins.
Industries at this stage continue to move along, but typically the industry growth
rate matches the growth rate for the economy as a whole.
Declining stage In the decline stage, sales growth can decline as new substitute
products are developed and shifts in demand occur. Think of the industry for home
radios, tobacco products, print media, and desktop computers. Some firms in an
industry experiencing decline face significantly lower profits or even losses. Rates of
return on invested capital tend to be low.
Concepts in Action
The Industry Life Cycle—Barnes and Noble
Like most firms, Barnes and Noble has been
dramatically impacted by the industry life cycle.
For Barnes and Noble, its industry life cycle was
compressed by the creation and tremendous
success of Amazon and e-commerce.
After years of consolidating independent
bookstores and small bookstore chains, Barnes
and Noble became a publicly traded company
in 1999. Barnes and Noble’s IPO was met with
considerable fanfare as the idea of a large
national bookstore was a revolutionary concept.
The progression of the firm through the industry
life cycle is traced by the measures presented in the
table below. Note, the phases of the life cycle are
meant to roughly illustrate the firm’s transition over
time and should not be viewed as definitive points
of demarcation for Barnes and Noble’s life cycle.
Life Cycle Phase Pioneering Expansion Stabilization Decline
Years 1993–1997 1998–2003 2004–2011 2012–2018
Annual Average
Revenue Growth 21.61% 13.78% 4.19% −8.15%
Net Profit Margin 0.16% 1.76% 1.97% −0.94%
Stock Return 39.69% 9.81% 1.52% 4.78%
Dividend Payout 0.00% 0.00% 36.50% 0.00%
Price-to-Book 2.23 2.54 1.69 1.23
As indicated in the table, the firm grew rapidly
during its pioneering phase with average annual
revenue growth of 21.61 percent. Typical of firms
in this stage, profitability was very limited with an
average net profit margin of only 0.16 percent. In
the pioneering stage, firms tend to be concerned
with capturing market share, and cost contain-
ment is less of a concern. As the firm entered the
expansion stage, revenue growth slowed, while
the firm’s profit margin expanded. The stabilization
phase brought a considerable reduction in sales
growth; however, profitability held constant and
380 Chapter 14 Sector/Industry Analysis
Assessing the industry life cycle The industry life cycle classification helps inves-
tors assess company growth potential. The approach helps in estimating potential
stock returns and risk for companies in the industry.
However, there are limitations to this type of analysis. First, it is only a generaliza-
tion, and investors must be careful not to attempt to categorize every industry, or
all companies within a particular industry, into neat categories. Second, even the
general framework may not apply to some industries with unique features. Finally,
the bottom line in security analysis is stock prices, a function of the expected stream
of benefits and the risk involved.
The industry life cycle tends to focus on sales, market share, and investment in
the industry. Although all of these factors are important to investors, they are not
the final items of interest. Given these qualifications to industry life cycle analysis,
what are the implications for investors?
The pioneering stage may offer the highest potential returns, but it also poses the
greatest risk. Many companies in the industry will fail or do poorly. Such risk may
be appropriate for some investors, but many will wish to avoid the risk inherent in
this stage.
Investors interested primarily in capital gains should avoid the maturity stage.
Companies at this stage may have relatively high dividend payouts because they have
fewer growth prospects. These companies often offer continuing stability in earn-
ings and dividend growth.
Clearly, in most cases, companies in the decline stage of the industrial life cycle
should be avoided. Investors should seek to spot industries that are transitioning
into this stage and avoid them.
• It is the expansion stage that is probably of most interest to investors. Indus-
tries that have survived the pioneering stage often offer good opportunities.
Growth is rapid but orderly, an appealing characteristic to investors.
even expanded somewhat as the firm focused on
controlling costs. The decline phase brought a sub-
stantial drop in revenue growth and profitability as
both measures moved into negative territory.
Note that Barnes and Noble experienced
outstanding stock performance during its pioneer-
ing phase with an average return of nearly
40 percent per year. However, its stock performance
subsided substantially over the subsequent
phases. In general, stock performance does not
follow a regular pattern across the phases of
the industry life cycle. Stock returns depend on
firm performance relative to investor expecta-
tions. Amazon unexpectedly squeezed Barnes
and Noble’s performance in the later stages of
its life cycle, which vastly diminished its stock
performance and pushed the firm into the decline
stage earlier than investors anticipated.
In early phases of their life cycle, firms tend
to allocate excess funds to expanding firm
operations, thus dividend payments are limited.
Barnes and Noble follows this typical pattern
with its dividend allocation showing up during
the stabilization phase. For Barnes and Noble, its
decline stage came somewhat abruptly, and
its negative profit margin did not provide capital
to fund a dividend.
As discussed in Chapter 10, price multiples
reflect investor outlook for a firm, with a higher
multiple reflecting greater optimism about the
firm’s prospects. The price-to-book (P/B) ratio
for Barnes and Noble shows that investors
viewed the firm’s prospects as strong in the first
two phases of its life cycle; however, investor
enthusiasm transitioned to pessimism by the time
the firm entered the decline phase.
380 Chapter 14 Sector/Industry Analysis
Assessing the industry life cycle The industry life cycle classification helps inves-
tors assess company growth potential. The approach helps in estimating potential
stock returns and risk for companies in the industry.
However, there are limitations to this type of analysis. First, it is only a generaliza-
tion, and investors must be careful not to attempt to categorize every industry, or
all companies within a particular industry, into neat categories. Second, even the
general framework may not apply to some industries with unique features. Finally,
the bottom line in security analysis is stock prices, a function of the expected stream
of benefits and the risk involved.
The industry life cycle tends to focus on sales, market share, and investment in
the industry. Although all of these factors are important to investors, they are not
the final items of interest. Given these qualifications to industry life cycle analysis,
what are the implications for investors?
The pioneering stage may offer the highest potential returns, but it also poses the
greatest risk. Many companies in the industry will fail or do poorly. Such risk may
be appropriate for some investors, but many will wish to avoid the risk inherent in
this stage.
Investors interested primarily in capital gains should avoid the maturity stage.
Companies at this stage may have relatively high dividend payouts because they have
fewer growth prospects. These companies often offer continuing stability in earn-
ings and dividend growth.
Clearly, in most cases, companies in the decline stage of the industrial life cycle
should be avoided. Investors should seek to spot industries that are transitioning
into this stage and avoid them.
• It is the expansion stage that is probably of most interest to investors. Indus-
tries that have survived the pioneering stage often offer good opportunities.
Growth is rapid but orderly, an appealing characteristic to investors.
even expanded somewhat as the firm focused on
controlling costs. The decline phase brought a sub-
stantial drop in revenue growth and profitability as
both measures moved into negative territory.
Note that Barnes and Noble experienced
outstanding stock performance during its pioneer-
ing phase with an average return of nearly
40 percent per year. However, its stock performance
subsided substantially over the subsequent
phases. In general, stock performance does not
follow a regular pattern across the phases of
the industry life cycle. Stock returns depend on
firm performance relative to investor expecta-
tions. Amazon unexpectedly squeezed Barnes
and Noble’s performance in the later stages of
its life cycle, which vastly diminished its stock
performance and pushed the firm into the decline
stage earlier than investors anticipated.
In early phases of their life cycle, firms tend
to allocate excess funds to expanding firm
operations, thus dividend payments are limited.
Barnes and Noble follows this typical pattern
with its dividend allocation showing up during
the stabilization phase. For Barnes and Noble, its
decline stage came somewhat abruptly, and
its negative profit margin did not provide capital
to fund a dividend.
As discussed in Chapter 10, price multiples
reflect investor outlook for a firm, with a higher
multiple reflecting greater optimism about the
firm’s prospects. The price-to-book (P/B) ratio
for Barnes and Noble shows that investors
viewed the firm’s prospects as strong in the first
two phases of its life cycle; however, investor
enthusiasm transitioned to pessimism by the time
the firm entered the decline phase
Using Sector/Industry Analysis as an Investor 383
As a second example, consider the actions of the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) with regard to the coal industry since 2010. At the end of 2010, the
Market Vectors coal ETF (KOL) was trading at $47 per share and by early 2016 had
dropped to about $6 per share. With the election of a new, more energy-friendly
administration in 2016, the price more than doubled to about $14 by early 2019.
Structural changes A fourth factor to consider is structural changes that occur
in the economy. As the United States continues to move from an industrial-
manufacturing society to an information-communications-services society, major
industries will be affected. New industries with tremendous potential are, and will
be, emerging, whereas some traditional industries, such as steel and print media,
may never recover to their former positions.
Structural shifts can occur even within relatively new industries. For example, in
the early 1980s, the microcomputer industry was a young, dynamic industry with
numerous competitors, some of whom enjoyed phenomenal success in a short time.
The introduction of microcomputers by IBM in 1982, however, forever changed
that industry. Other hardware manufacturers sought to be compatible with IBM’s
personal computer, and suppliers rushed to supply items such as software, printers,
and additional memory boards. IBM’s decision to enter this market significantly
affected virtually every part of the industry.
Using Sector/Industry Analysis
as an Investor
Assess the Business Cycle
A useful procedure for investors to assess sector/industry prospects is to analyze sec-
tors by their operating ability in relation to the economy as a whole. That is, some
sectors perform poorly during a recession, whereas others are able to weather it rea-
sonably well. Some sectors move closely with the business cycle, outperforming in
good times and underperforming in bad times. In analyzing sectors and industries,
investors should be aware of these relationships.
A primary goal of fundamental security analysis is to identify growth industries.
Growth industries have characteristics that allow companies operating in the indus-
try to maintain above-average earnings growth even when there are setbacks in the
economy.
Cyclical sectors/industries have above-average sensitivity to economic condi-
tions—they do unusually well when the economy prospers and are harmed more
when the economy falters. Sectors that manufacture durable goods are typically
identified as cyclical sectors. For example, autos, appliances, computers, and heavy
equipment tend to be avidly sought when times are good, but such purchases are
commonly postponed during recessions because consumers can often make do with
the old units.6 Companies in cyclical sectors sell products that are generally pur-
chased with discretionary income. The products are often considered luxury items.
At the opposite end of the scale are the defensive sectors, which are least affected
by recessions and economic adversity. Food, healthcare, and utilities have long been
Growth Industries Indus-
tries with above-average
expected earnings growth
Cyclical Industries Indus-
tries most affected, both
up and down, by the
business cycle
Defensive Industries
Industries least affected by
recessions and economic
adversity
6 Countercyclical industries also exist, actually moving opposite to the prevailing economic trend. The
gold mining industry is said to follow this pattern.
384 Chapter 14 Sector/Industry Analysis
considered examples of defensive sectors. People must eat, heat and cool their
homes, and take medication regardless of the economy. Companies in defensive
sectors offer products that are considered necessities.
Cyclical sectors are often differentiated from defensive sectors by the sectors’
beta. Since cyclical sectors have above-average sensitivity to economic conditions,
they generally have above-average betas (betas greater than 1.0). In contrast, defen-
sive sectors have below-average sensitivity to economic conditions, and their betas
are typically less than 1.0.
Table 14.3 reports the betas for the 16 sectors discussed previously. Those sectors
that rely on consumers having significant disposable income to purchase “big ticket”
items have relatively high betas. For example, the highest betas are reported for the
steel, mining, chemicals, autos, and consumer durables sectors. On the other hand,
the sectors that offer products that are considered necessities have relatively low betas.
For example, the lowest betas are reported for the utility, food, and drugs sectors.
If an investor forecasts that the economy is heading into a recession, cyclical
industries are likely to be affected more than other industries, whereas defensive
industries are likely to be least affected. Therefore, the investor would want to
increase his allocation to defensive sectors and reduce his allocation to cyclical sec-
tors. Of course, to be successful, the investor would need to be proficient in forecast-
ing economic changes in advance of his fellow investors.
General economic conditions play a crucial role in the performance of companies in
all sectors; however, investors should be aware that other factors have a substantial impact
on the performance of particular sectors. For example, interest rate-sensitive sectors are
particularly sensitive to expectations about changes in interest rates. The finance and
construction sectors are obvious examples of interest rate-sensitive sectors.
Sector Betas
Sector Beta
Food 0.58
Mining and minerals 1.46
Oil and petroleum products 1.23
Apparel and footwear 1.10
Consumer durables 1.30
Chemicals 1.39
Drugs, soap, perfumes, and tobacco 0.62
Construction and building materials 1.27
Steelworks 1.69
Fabricated products 1.23
Machinery and business equipment 1.28
Automobiles 1.38
Transportation 1.05
Utilities 0.49
Retail stores 0.84
Banks, insurers, and other financials 1.23
Source: Values were derived from data obtained from the Kenneth French website.
TABLE 14.3
Using Sector/Industry Analysis as an Investor 385
Review Investment Advisory Services About Industries
It is important for the investor to know what the current thinking is about sector
and industry prospects. The quickest and easiest way to do this is to consult inde-
pendent, trusted advisory services that have the resources to analyze industry pros-
pects on an ongoing basis.
One of the most convenient and useful sources of information about industries is
The Value Line Investment Survey, which ranks approximately 100 industry groupings.
Investors can quickly see which industries are expected to perform well over the
year ahead and which are not.
Sector Rotation
Numerous investors use sector analysis in their investing strategy. The premise here
is simple—companies within the same industry group are generally affected by the
same market and economic conditions. Therefore, if an investor can spot impor-
tant developments in the sector or industry quickly enough, appropriate portfolio
changes can be made to profit from these insights.
Institutional investors such as mutual funds analyze industry groupings care-
fully in order to determine which are losing momentum and which are gaining.
When a trend is spotted, these investors rotate into favorable sectors and out
of sectors losing favor with investors. The strategy is to invest in the likely best
performing companies in the favorable sectors. When the stock prices rise and
appear to be fully valued, secondary companies are identified and purchased.
Ultimately, the favorable sectors become fairly valued or overvalued, or eco-
nomic conditions for the sector become less favorable, and money rotates into
new sectors.
Individual investors can utilize sector rotation for industries and avoid analyz-
ing individual companies. If, for example, the technology industry is ranked highly
for one-year ahead performance, an investor can buy a sector fund. As noted in
Chapter 11, investment companies offer a multitude of sector funds and ETFs,
which facilitate a sector rotation strategy.
Evaluating Future Industry Prospects
Picking industries for next year To determine industry performance for shorter
periods of time, investors should ask themselves the following question: Given the
current and prospective economic situation, which industries are likely to show
improving earnings? In many respects, this is the key question for industry secu-
rity analysis. Investors can turn to I/B/E/S, which compiles institutional brokerage
earnings estimates for various industries.
Investments Intuition
Clearly, business cycle analysis for industries is
a logical and worthwhile part of fundamental
security analysis. Industries have varying sensi-
tivities to business conditions and interest rate
expectations at any given time, and the smart
investor thinks carefully about the impact
that economic factors will have on industry
profitability.
386 Chapter 14 Sector/Industry Analysis
Given the importance of earnings and the availability of earnings estimates for
industries and companies, are investors able to make relatively easy investment
choices? The answer is no, because earnings estimates are notoriously inaccurate.
Of course, investors must also consider the likely P/E ratios for industries. Which
industries are likely to show improving P/E ratios?
Other questions to consider are the likely direction of interest rates and which
industries will be most affected by a significant change in interest rates. A change in
interest rates, other things being equal, leads to a change in the discount rate (and a
change in the multiplier). Which industries will be most affected by possible future
political events, such as a new administration, renewed inflation, new technology,
an increase in defense spending, and so on?
As with all security analysis, we can use several procedures in analyzing industries.
Much of this process is common sense. For example, if you can reasonably forecast
a declining number of competitors in an industry, it stands to reason that, other
things being equal, the remaining firms will be more profitable.
Assessing longer-term prospects To forecast industry performance over the
long run, investors should ask the following questions:
1. Which sectors and industries are likely candidates for growth and prosperity
over, say, the next decade?
2. Which sectors and industries appear likely to have difficulties as the United
States continues to change to an information-collecting and information-
processing economy with a significant service component?
Would it surprise you to learn that in early 2012 the
home building industry was ranked next to last out of
all industries ranked by The Value Line Investment Survey? Probably not, given
what everyone knows about the real estate market and the large inventory of
empty houses. However, you probably would have been surprised to learn that
railroads ranked fifth and automotive eleventh.
EXAMPLE 14.4
Concepts in Action
One Way Investors Can Use Published
Information Involving Industries
Standard & Poor’s Outlook, a weekly publication,
periodically reports on the performance of an
“Industry Momentum Portfolio.” A buy recom-
mendation results when an industry has been
in the top 10 percent of all industry changes
over the preceding 12 months. The company in
the industry with the highest S&P STARS rating
(up to five stars) is selected to represent that
industry. Industries are removed when their
relative 12-month performance is below the top
30 percent of all industries covered. According to
Standard & Poor’s, this portfolio has substantially
outperformed the S&P 500.
Questions 387
Summary
• Sector/industry analysis is the second of three steps in a top-down framework
of fundamental security analysis, following economy/market analysis but pre-
ceding individual company analysis. The objective is to identify those sectors/
industries that will perform best in terms of returns to stockholders.
• Is sector/industry analysis valuable? Yes, because over the long run some sec-
tors and industries perform much better than others.
• Industry performance is not consistent; past price performance does not
always predict future price performance. Particularly over shorter periods
such as one or two years, industry performance rankings may completely
reverse themselves.
• Although the term industry at first seems self-explanatory, industry definitions
and classifications are not straightforward, and the trend toward diversifica-
tion of activities over the years has blurred the lines even more.
• North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) uses a production-
oriented conceptual framework; whereby, companies are classified into indus-
tries based on the activity in which they are primarily engaged. Basically,
companies that do similar things in similar ways are classified together.
• A number of investment information services, such as Standard & Poor’s and
Value Line, use their own industry classifications.
• To analyze industries, a useful first step is to examine their stage in the life
cycle, which in its simplest form consists of the pioneering, expansion, matu-
rity, and decline stages.
• One industry analysis approach is business cycle analysis. Industries perform
differently at various stages in the business cycle.
• Another approach involves a qualitative analysis of important factors affecting
industries.
• Sector rotation involves identifying sectors that are expected to perform well;
individual company analysis can be avoided. ETFs and sector mutual funds
can be used to implement this approach.
• Investors interested in evaluating future industry prospects have a wide range
of data available. These data can be used for in-depth analysis of industries
using standard security analysis techniques.
