171CHAPTER 7
With $1 million to invest, you can
have a nice portfolio of securities,
but what is a portfolio exactly? You
have heard people say, don’t put
all your eggs in one basket, so how
does that apply to investing? If you
decide to put the entire $1 million
in two stocks, what will the trustee
say? Popular press articles routinely
discuss the importance of diversi-
fication, or note that some stocks
react negatively to economic devel-
opments such as the threat of ris-
ing inflation, while others respond
positively. Therefore, it seems like a
good idea to learn about the basics
of portfolio theory. Then you will not be intimidated when someone starts talking
about Markowitz (modern) portfolio theory, which is a universal concept that is
widely known and discussed by investors.
In this chapter, we outline the nature of risk and return as it applies to mak-
ing investment decisions. Unlike Chapter 6, we are talking about the future, which
involves expected returns, and not the past, which involves realized returns. Investors
must estimate and manage the risk and returns of their investments. By building
diversified portfolios, they reduce risk to the maximum extent possible without
negatively affecting returns. Therefore, we should consider the investor’s total port-
folio and analyze investment risk accordingly. As we shall see, diversification is the
key to effective risk management. We will consider the critically important principle of
Markowitz diversification, focusing primarily on the concepts of correlation and
covariance as applied to security returns.
Dealing With Uncertainty
In Chapter 6, we discussed average returns, both arithmetic and geometric, that
investors experienced from investing in the major financial assets. We also con-
sidered the risk of these asset returns as measured by the standard deviation or
variance.
Portfolio Theory
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Calculate and interpret risk and
expected return measures for an
individual security.
• Discuss the implications of modern
portfolio theory.
• Calculate portfolio risk and return
measures as formulated by
Markowitz.
• Explain how diversification works
Realized returns are important for several reasons. First, investors need to know
how their portfolios have performed relative to relevant market indices. Second,
realized returns are important in helping investors form expectations about future
returns by providing a foundation upon which to make estimates of expected
returns. For example, if over a long period Treasury bills averaged less than 4 per-
cent return, it would be unrealistic to expect a future return of 6 or 7 percent from
Treasury bills unless the investing environment has changed significantly.
How do we go about estimating returns, which is what investors must do in man-
aging their portfolios? First, note that we will use the risk and return measures devel-
oped in Chapter 6. The return measure is applicable whether one is measuring
realized returns or estimating future (expected) returns because it includes every-
thing the investor can expect to receive over any specified future period.
Similarly, the variance, or its square root, the standard deviation, is an accepted
measure of variability for both realized returns and expected returns. We will calcu-
late both the variance and the standard deviation in the following text and use them
interchangeably as the situation dictates. Sometimes it is preferable to use one, and
sometimes the other.
To estimate the returns from various securities, investors must estimate the cash
flows these securities are likely to provide. The basis for doing so for bonds and
stocks will be covered in their respective chapters. For now, it is sufficient to remind
ourselves of the uncertainty of the future, a problem emphasized in Chapter 1.
Exhibit 7.1 presents an interesting discussion of risk and how best to under-
stand it. In this essay, Peter Bernstein, one of the most prominent observers of the
investing environment, argues that risky decisions are all about three elements.
His second point, “expect the unexpected,” turned out to be particularly relevant
given what happened to the financial system in 2008. The unexpected did occur,
and very few were prepared to deal with the situation. The resulting damage was
enormous.
Using Probabilities
The return an investor will earn from investing is not known; it must be estimated.
Future return is an expected return and may or may not actually be realized. An inves-
tor may expect the return on a particular security to be 10 percent for the coming
year, but in truth, this is only a “point estimate.” Risk, or the chance that some unfa-
vorable event will occur, is present when investment decisions are made. Investors
are often overly optimistic about expected returns. We can use the term random
variable to describe the one-period rate of return from a stock (or bond)—it has an
uncertain value which fluctuates randomly.
To deal with the uncertainty of returns, investors need to think explicitly about
a security’s distribution of probable returns. In other words, while investors may
expect a security to return 10 percent, this is only a point estimate of the entire
range of possibilities. Given that investors must deal with the uncertain future, a
number of possible returns can, and will, occur.
In the case of a Treasury bond, the interest payment will be made with 100 per-
cent certainty barring a financial collapse of the country. The probability of occur-
rence is 1.0, because no other outcome is possible.
With the possibility of multiple outcomes, which is the norm for common stocks,
each possible outcome must be considered and a probability of its occurrence
assessed. The probability for a particular outcome is simply the chance that the
specified outcome will occur and is typically expressed as a decimal or fraction.
Dealing With Uncertainty 173
EXHIBIT 7.1 | Risk: The Whole versus the Parts
Many years ago, in the middle of a staff meeting, a col-
league passed me a scrap of paper on which he had writ-
ten, “When all is said and done, more things are said
than done.” When I consider the plethora of books,
articles, consultants, and conferences on risk in today’s
world, my friend’s aphorism has never seemed more
appropriate. Are we never going to nail risk down and
bring it under control? How much more can anyone
reveal to us beyond what we have already been told?
In a very real sense, this flood of material about risk is
inherently risky. Sorting out the pieces and searching for
main themes has become an escalating challenge. The
root of the matter gets lost in the shuffle while we are
analyzing all the elegant advances in risk measurement
and the impressive broadening of the kinds of risks we
seek to manage. More is said than is done, or what is
done loses touch with what has been said.
If we go back to first principles for a moment, per-
haps we can put the multifarious individual pieces
into some kind of a larger framework and optimize
the choices among the masses of information we are
attempting to master.
Professor Elroy Dimson of the London Business School
once said risk means more things can happen than will
happen. Dimson’s formulation is only a fancy way of saying
that we do not know what is going to happen—good or
bad. Even the range of possible outcomes remains indeter-
minate, much as we would like to nail it down. Remember
always: Risk is not about uncertainty but about the unknown,
the inescapable darkness of the future.
If more things can happen than will happen, and if
we are denied precise knowledge of the range of pos-
sible outcomes, some decisions we make are going to be wrong.
How many, how often, how seriously? We have no way of
knowing even that. Even the most elegant model, as Leib-
niz reminded Jacob Bernoulli in 1703, is going to work
“only for the most part.” What lurks in the smaller part is
hidden from us, but it could turn into a load of dynamite.
The beginning of wisdom in life is in accepting the
inevitability of being wrong on occasion. Or, to turn that
phrase around, the greatest risks we take are those where
we are certain of the outcome—as masses of people
are at classic market bottoms and tops. My investment
philosophy has always been that victory in the long-run
accrues to the humble rather than to the bold.
This emphasis on ignorance is the necessary first step
toward the larger framework we need if we hope to sort
out the flood of information about risk that assails us.
Now we can break down the problem of risk into what
appear to me to be its three primary constituent parts.
First, what is the balance between the consequences
of being wrong and the probability of being wrong?
Many mistakes do not matter. Other mistakes can be
fatal. No matter how small the probability you will be
hit by a car when you cross against the lights, the con-
sequences of being hit deserve the greater weight in the
decision. This line of questioning is the beginning, and
in some ways the end, of risk management. All decisions
must pass through this sieve. It is the end if you decide
not to take the risk, but it is also the end in the sense that
distinguishing between consequences and probabilities
is what risk management is all about.
Second, expect the unexpected. That sounds like
an empty cliché, but it has profound meaning for risk
management. It is easy to prepare for the risks you know—
earnings fail to meet expectations, clients depart, bonds
go sour, and a valued associate goes to a competitor. Insur-
ance and hedging strategies cover other kinds of risks lying
in wait out there, from price volatility to premature death.
But preparation for the unexpected is a matter of
the decision-making structure, and nothing else. Who is
in charge here? That is the critical question in any orga-
nization. And if it is just you there when the unexpected
strikes, then you should prepare in advance for where
you will turn for help when matters seem to be running
out of control.
Finally, note that word “control.” With an exit
strategy—when decisions are easily reversible—con-
trol over outcomes can be a secondary matter. But with
decisions such as launching a new product or getting
married, the costs of reversibility are so high that you
should not enter into them unless you have some control
over the outcome if things turn out differently from what
you expect. Gambling is fun because your bet is irrevers-
ible and you have no control over the outcome. But real
life is not a gambling casino.
These three elements are what risky decisions are all
about—consequences versus probabilities, preparation
for dealing with unexpected outcomes, and the distinc-
tion between reversibility and control. These are where
things get done, not said.
174 Chapter 7 Portfolio Theory
Probability Distributions
A probability distribution for a security brings together the likely outcomes that may
occur along with the probabilities associated with these likely outcomes. The set of
probabilities in a probability distribution must sum to 1.0, or 100 percent because
they must completely describe all the (perceived) occurrences.
How are these probabilities and associated outcomes obtained? In the final
analysis, investing for some future period involves uncertainty, and therefore
subjective estimates. Although past occurrences may be relied on heavily to esti-
mate the probabilities, the past must be modified for any changes expected in
the future.
Probability distributions can be either discrete or continuous. With a discrete
probability distribution, a probability is assigned to each possible outcome. In Fig-
ure 7.1a, five possible returns are assumed for General Foods for next year. Each of
these five possible outcomes—1, 7, 8, 10, and 15 percent—has an associated prob-
ability; these probabilities sum to 1.0, indicating that the possible outcomes that an
investor foresees for General Foods have been accounted for.
With a continuous probability distribution, as shown in Figure 7.1b, an infinite
number of possible outcomes exist. Because probability is now measured as the area
under the curve in Figure 7.1b, the emphasis is on the probability that a particular
outcome is within some range of values.
The most familiar continuous distribution is the normal distribution depicted in
Figure 7.1b. This is the well-known bell-shaped curve often used in statistics. It is a
two-parameter distribution in that the mean and the variance fully describe it.
Probability function
Rate of return (%)
(a)
(b)
0
0.5
1
5 10 15
Probability
Rate of return (%)
FIGURE 7.1 (a) A discrete probability distribution; (b) a continuous probability distribution
Dealing With Uncertainty 175
Calculating Expected Return for a Security
To describe the single most likely outcome from a particular probability distribution, it
is necessary to calculate its expected value. The expected value of a probability distribu-
tion is the weighted average of all possible outcomes, where each outcome is weighted
by its respective probability of occurrence. Since investors are interested in returns, we
will call this expected value the expected return, and for any security, it is calculated as:
E R R
i
m
i i( ) 1
pr (7-1)
where
E R
R ii
( ) the expected return on a security
the th possible rreturn
pr the probability of the th return
the numbe
i ii R
m rr of possible returns
Calculating Risk for a Security
Investors must be able to quantify and measure risk. To calculate the total (stand-
alone) risk associated with the expected return, the variance or standard deviation
is used. The variance and its square root, standard deviation, are measures of the
spread or dispersion in the probability distribution; that is, they measure the disper-
sion of a random variable around its mean. The larger this dispersion, the larger the
variance or standard deviation.
• The tighter the probability distribution of expected returns, the smaller the
standard deviation, and the smaller the risk.
Expected Return The ex
ante return expected by
investors over some future
holding period
Based on your analysis, you think that next year’s return
for General Foods will range from 1 to 15 percent
as described earlier. The expected value of the probability distribution for
General Foods returns is calculated in the first three columns of Table 7.1. We
call this expected value the expected return.
EXAMPLE 7.1
Calculating the Standard Deviation Using Expected Data
(1)
Possible
Return (%)
(2)
Probability
(3)
(1) × (2)
(4)
Ri − E(R)
(5)
(Ri − E(R))2
(6)
(R i − E(R))2
pri
1 0.2 0.2 −7.0 49.0 9.8
7 0.2 1.4 −1.0 1.0 0.2
8 0.3 2.4 0.0 0.0 0.0
10 0.1 1.0 2.0 4.0 0.4
15 0.2 3.0 7.0 49.0 9.8
1.0 8.0 = E(R) 20.2
σ = (20.2)1/2 = 4.49%
176 Chapter 7 Portfolio Theory
To calculate the variance or standard deviation from the probability distribution,
first calculate the expected return of the distribution using Equation 7-1. Essentially,
the same procedure used in Chapter 6 to measure risk applies here, but now the prob-
abilities associated with the outcomes must be included, as in Equation 7-2:
Variance of returns pr2
1
2
i
m
i iR E R( ) (7-2)
and
Standard deviation of returns 2 1 2/
(7-3)
where all terms are as defined previously.
Note that the standard deviation is simply a weighted average of the deviations
from the expected value. As such, it provides a measure of how far the actual value
may differ from the expected value, either above or below. With a normal probabil-
ity distribution, the actual return on a security will be within ±1 standard deviation
of the expected return approximately 68 percent of the time, and within ±2 stand-
ard deviations approximately 95 percent of the time.
Calculating a standard deviation using probability distributions involves making
subjective estimates of the probabilities and the likely returns. However, we cannot
avoid such estimates because future returns are uncertain. The prices of securities
are based on investors’ expectations about the future. The relevant standard devia-
tion in this situation is the ex ante standard deviation and not the ex post standard
deviation, which is based on realized returns.
Although standard deviations based on realized returns are often used as prox-
ies for ex ante standard deviations, investors should be careful to remember that the
past cannot be extrapolated into the future without modifications.
• Standard deviations calculated using historical data may be convenient, but
they are subject to errors when used as estimates of the future.
Checking Your Understanding
1. The expected return for a security is typically different from any of the pos-
sible outcomes (returns) used to calculate it. How, then, can we say that it is
the security’s expected return?
2. Having calculated a security’s standard deviation using a probability distribu-
tion, how confident can we be in this number?
Introduction to Modern Portfolio Theory
In the 1950s, Harry Markowitz, the father of Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT), devel-
oped the basic portfolio principles that underlie MPT. His original contribution
The variance and standard deviation for General Foods,
using the information reported above, is calculated in
Table 7.1.
EXAMPLE 7.2
Portfolio Return and Risk 177
was published in 1952, making portfolio theory over 60 years old. Over time, these
principles have been widely adopted by the financial community in a variety of ways,
creating a broad legacy for MPT. 1
The primary impact of MPT is that it provides a framework for the systematic
selection of portfolios based on expected return and risk principles. Most portfolio
managers are aware of, and to varying degrees apply, the basic principles of MPT.
Major mutual fund families employ the implications of MPT in managing their
funds, financial advisors use the principles of MPT in advising their clients, many
financial commentators use MPT terms in discussing the current investing environ-
ment, and so forth.
Before Markowitz, investors dealt loosely with the concepts of risk and return.
Investors have known intuitively for many years that it is smart to diversify, that is,
not to “put all your eggs in one basket.” Markowitz, however, was the first to develop
the concept of portfolio diversification in a formal way—he quantified the concept
of diversification. He showed quantitatively why, and how, portfolio diversification
works to reduce the risk of a portfolio to an investor.
Markowitz sought to organize the existing thoughts and practices into a more
formal framework and to answer a basic question: Is the risk of a portfolio equal
to the sum of the risks of the individual securities comprising it? The answer is
no! Markowitz was the first to show that we must account for the interrelationships
among security returns in order to calculate portfolio risk and in order to reduce
portfolio risk to its minimum level for any given level of return.
Portfolio Return and Risk
When we analyze investment returns and risks, we must consider the total portfolio
held by an investor. Individual security risk and return is important, but it is the risk
and return to the investor’s portfolio that ultimately matters. Optimal portfolios can
be constructed if portfolios are diversified correctly. As we learned in Chapter 1, an
investor’s portfolio is his or her combination of assets.
As we will see, portfolio risk is a unique characteristic and not simply the sum of
individual security risks. A security may have high risk if held by itself, but much less
risk when held in a portfolio of securities. Since investors are concerned primarily
with the risk to their total wealth, as represented by their portfolio, individual stocks
are risky only to the extent that they add risk to the portfolio.
1 See Frank J. Fabozzi, Francis Gupta, and Harry M. Markowitz, “The Legacy of Modern Portfolio Theory,”
The Journal of Investing (Fall 2002): 7–22.
Investments Intuition
Clearly, investors thought about diversifying a
portfolio before Markowitz’s landmark work. But
they did so in general terms. And it is true that not
everyone uses his analysis today. However, the
tenets of portfolio theory are widely used today,
by themselves or in conjunction with other tech-
niques, and by both institutional investors and
individual investors.
178 Chapter 7 Portfolio Theory
Portfolio Expected Return
Portfolio weights The percentages of a portfolio’s total value that are invested in
each portfolio asset are referred to as portfolio weights, which we will denote by w.
The combined portfolio weights sum to 100 percent of total investable funds, or 1.0,
indicating that all portfolio funds are invested. That is,
w w w wn
i
n
i1 2
1
1 0 . (7-4)
Calculating the expected return on a portfolio The expected return on
any portfolio p can be calculated as a weighted average of the individual security
expected returns:
E R w E Rp
i
n
i i( ) ( )
1
(7-5)
where
E R
w
p
i
( ) the expected return on the portfolio
the portfolio weight for the th security
the expected ret
i
w
E R
i
i
1 0.
( ) uurn on the th security
the number of different securiti
i
n ees in the portfolio
• The expected returns for individual securities
• Multiplied by the weights assigned to each security
• When added together form the expected return on
a portfolio
Portfolio Weights
Percentages of portfolio
funds invested in each
security
With equal dollar amounts invested in three securities,
the portfolio weights are 0.333, 0.333, and 0.333. For an
equal-weighted portfolio of five securities, each security would have a portfolio
weight of 0.20. Of course, weights do not have to be equal. A five-stock portfolio
could have weights of 0.40, 0.10, 0.15, 0.25, and 0.10.
EXAMPLE 7.3
Consider a three-stock portfolio consisting of stocks G, H,
and I with expected returns of 12, 20, and 17 percent,
respectively. Assume that 50 percent of investable funds are invested in security
G, 30 percent in H, and 20 percent in I. The expected return on the portfolio is
E Rp( ) . ( %) . ( %) . ( %) . %0 5 12 0 3 20 0 2 17 15 4
EXAMPLE 7.4
Analyzing Portfolio Risk 179
• Regardless of the number of assets held in a portfolio, or the proportion of
total investable funds placed in each asset, the expected return on the port-
folio is always a weighted average of the expected returns for individual assets
in the portfolio.
Portfolio Risk
Risk and return are the basis of all investing decisions. Risk is measured by the vari-
ance (or standard deviation) of the portfolio’s return, exactly as in the case of an
individual security. Typically, portfolio risk is stated in terms of standard deviation.
A major implication of MPT is as follows: Although the expected return of a
portfolio is a weighted average of the expected returns of the individual securities
included in the portfolio, portfolio risk is not a weighted average of the risk of the
individual securities in the portfolio. Symbolically,
E R w E Rp
i
n
i i( ) ( )
1
(7-6)
p
i
n
i iw2
1
2 (7-7)
Equation 7-7 is an inequality, and, in fact, investors can reduce the risk of a port-
folio beyond what it would be if risk were simply a weighted average of the indi-
vidual securities’ risk. In order to see how this risk reduction is accomplished, we
analyze portfolio risk in detail.
• Portfolio risk is always less than a weighted average of the risks of the securities
in the portfolio unless the securities have outcomes that vary together exactly,
which is an almost impossible occurrence.
Analyzing Portfolio Risk
Risk Reduction—The Insurance Principle
To begin our analysis of how forming a portfolio of assets can reduce risk, assume
that all security risk sources in a portfolio are independent. As we add securities to
the portfolio, the exposure to any particular source of risk becomes small. Accord-
ing to the Law of Large Numbers, the larger the sample size, the more likely it is that
the sample mean will be close to the population expected value. Risk reduction in
the case of independent risk sources can be thought of as the insurance principle,
Investments Intuition
The expected return for a portfolio must fall bet-
ween the highest and lowest expected returns for
the individual securities making up the portfolio.
Exactly where it falls is determined by the per-
centages of investable funds placed in each of
the individual securities in the portfolio.
180 Chapter 7 Portfolio Theory
named for the idea that an insurance company reduces its risk by writing many poli-
cies against many independent sources of risk.
We start by assuming the most extreme case in which individual security returns
are statistically independent such that any one security’s return is unaffected by anoth-
er’s return. In this situation, and only in this situation, the standard deviation of the
portfolio is given by
p
i
n1 2/ (7-8)
Equation 7-8 describes the extreme case of independent risk sources, which
implies that all risk is firm specific. In this situation, the total risk continues to fall
toward 0 as securities are added. Unfortunately, when it comes to investing in finan-
cial assets, the assumption of statistically independent returns is unrealistic.
In practice, most stocks are positively correlated with each other; that is, the
movements in their returns are related, not independent. We call the variation in
returns that is attributable to general market moves, market risk. While total risk
can be reduced, it cannot be eliminated because market risk cannot be eliminated.
Unlike firm-specific risk, common sources of risk (market risk) affect all firms and
cannot be diversified away. For example, an increase in interest rates affects most
firms adversely because most firms borrow funds to finance part of their operations.
Diversification
Another major implication of MPT is that there are two general sources of risk,
firm-specific and market risk. Because the sources of risk are not entirely independ-
ent, adding securities reduces the firm-specific risk, but not the market risk. The
process of adding securities to a portfolio to reduce firm-specific risk is referred to
as diversification.
• Diversification is the key to managing portfolio risk because it allows investors
to significantly lower portfolio risk without adversely affecting return.
We consider two forms of portfolio diversification, beginning with random diver-
sification and moving to efficient portfolio diversification, which is based on MPT
principles.
Random diversification Random or naive diversification refers to the act of ran-
domly diversifying without regard to how security returns are related to each other.
An investor simply selects a relatively large number of securities randomly—the
The risk of a portfolio declines quickly as more securities
are added. Using Equation 7-8 and assuming that each
security’s standard deviation is 20 percent, the risk of a 100-security portfolio
is reduced to 2.0 percent:
p
20
100
2 0
1 2/
. %
EXAMPLE 7.5
The Components of Portfolio Risk 181
proverbial “throwing a dart at The Wall Street Journal page of stock quotes.” As we add
securities to a portfolio, the total risk associated with the portfolio of stocks declines
rapidly even without the use of any investment insight. The first few stocks cause a
large decrease in portfolio risk.
The benefits of diversification kick in immediately—two stocks are better than
one, three stocks are better than two, and so on. However, diversification cannot
completely eliminate the risk in a portfolio because the market risk cannot be elimi-
nated. As additional stocks are added, risk is reduced, but the marginal risk reduc-
tion becomes smaller with each security added.
Although random diversification is clearly beneficial, it is generally not optimal.
To take full advantage of the benefits of diversification, we need to understand effi-
cient diversification; that is, we need to understand portfolio risk within an MPT
context.
Checking Your Understanding
3. What does it mean to an investor that the benefits of diversification kick in
immediately but are limited?
The Components of Portfolio Risk
In order to develop an equation for portfolio risk, as measured by variance or stand-
ard deviation, we must account for two factors:
1. The weighted individual security risks (i.e., the variance of each security,
weighted by the percentage of funds invested in the security)
2. The weighted comovements between securities’ returns (i.e., the weighted
covariance between each security’s returns and the returns of all other securi-
ties in the portfolio)
The covariance and the correlation coefficient are prominent measures of
comovement between security returns and are both used commonly in deriving
portfolio risk. These two measures are discussed in detail in the following text.
Covariance
Covariance is defined as the extent to which two random variables covary (move
together) over time. In financial markets, the variables in question are typically the
returns on two securities. Covariance can be:
1. Positive, indicating that the returns on the two securities tend to move in the
same direction; when one increases (decreases), the other tends to do the
same.2
2. Negative, indicating that the returns on the two securities tend to move inversely;
when one increases (decreases), the other tends to decrease (increase).
3. Zero, indicating that the returns on the two securities are independent and
have no tendency to move together.
182 Chapter 7 Portfolio Theory
The formula for calculating the expected covariance for two securities is
AB A A B B pr
i
m
i i iR E R R E R
1
, ,( ) ( ) (7-9)
where
AB
A
the covariance between securities A and B
one possR i, iible return on security A
the expected return on secAE R( ) uurity A
the number of likely outcomes for a security form the period
3
Equation 7-9 indicates that covariance is the sum of the weighted products of
the return deviations from their expected values. In Equation 7-9, if the returns for
both A and B are above their expected value or below their expected value at the
same time, the product will be positive, leading to a positive covariance. If, on the
other hand, A is above its expected value when B is below its expected value, the
product will be negative, and with enough counter occurrences, the covariance will
be negative.
The size of the covariance measure depends on the units of the variables involved
and changes when these units are changed. Therefore, the covariance primarily pro-
vides information to investors about whether the association between asset returns
is positive, negative, or zero because simply observing the number itself, without any
context with which to assess the number, is not very useful.
We offer the following as an example of the limitation of covariance as a measure
of comovement. Assume you are told two securities, R and S, have a covariance of
325. What does this indicate about the comovement between security R and security
S? Since the value is positive, you know the two have a positive association, that is,
when one performs well (poorly), the other tends to also perform well (poorly).
But how strong is the association? This is where covariance offers little guidance.
We really do not know whether a covariance of 325 indicates a weak or a strong
positive association. Fortunately, the correlation coefficient, which we discuss next,
overcomes this limitation of covariance.
The Correlation Coefficient
In investments, the correlation coefficient (correlation) is a statistical measure of
the relative comovements between security returns. Like covariance, correlation (ρAB
)
measures the extent to which the returns on two securities move together. Further-
more, both measures denote the association between the two securities; however,
they do not offer guidance regarding causation. For example, two oil companies
may have security returns that have a high covariance, that is, they are highly corre-
lated. This does not mean the movements in one cause the movements in the other;
instead, both firms are reliant on a common underlying factor, the price of oil.
Covariance and correlation are related in the following manner:
AB
AB
A B
(7-10)
3 The order does not matter, because AB BA .
Correlation Coefficient
A statistical measure of
the extent to which two
variables are associated
The Components of Portfolio Risk 183
This equation shows that the correlation is simply a standardized covariance
measure. To derive correlation, covariance is standardized by dividing the value by
the product of the two standard deviations.
Or alternatively, by rearranging the formula, the covariance can be written as
AB AB A B (7-11)
Therefore, by knowing the covariance, we can calculate the correlation (and vice
versa) because the standard deviations of the assets’ returns are already known.
From the formulas, we can establish that when the covariance is positive, the cor-
relation will also be positive. Likewise, when the covariance is negative, the correla-
tion will be negative. This relationship is evident because standard deviation (as the
square root of variance) is always a positive value.
While correlation and covariance are both measures of comovement, the primary
difference between the two is that correlation is a bounded measure of comove-
ment. In particular, correlation is a relative measure of association that is bounded
by +1.0 and −1.0 with
AB
AB
1: perfect positive correlation
1: perfect negativve correlation
0: zero, or no, correlationAB
When analyzing how security returns move together, it is more convenient to talk
about the correlation because we can immediately assess the degree of association.
Remember that hypothetical covariance of 325 that we assumed between security
R and security S. Depending upon the security standard deviations, that covariance
may translate to a correlation of 0.9, which indicates a very strong positive correla-
tion (the highest is 1.0). On the other hand, it may translate to a correlation of 0.1,
which indicates a weak positive correlation.
Overall, we can conclude that covariance and correlation are similar measures of
comovement; both provide information about the association of two securities. Cor-
relation, however, extends the information that covariance offers by indicating both
direction of association and strength of association. For this reason, correlation is
much more popular as a measure of comovement.
Perfect positive correlation With perfect positive correlation, the returns have a
perfect direct linear relationship. Knowing what the return on one security will do
allows an investor to forecast perfectly what the other will do. In Figure 7.2, stocks
A and B have identical return patterns over the six-year period 2013–2018. When
stock A’s return goes up, stock B’s does also. When stock A’s return goes down, stock
B’s does also.
Notice that a portfolio combining stocks A and B (portfolio AB), with 50 percent
invested in each, has exactly the same return as does either stock by itself, since the
returns are identical. The risk of the portfolio, as measured by the standard devia-
tion, is identical to the standard deviation of either stock by itself.
• When returns are perfectly positively correlated, portfolio risk is simply a
weighted average of the individual securities’ risks. This is the one case where
diversification does not lead to a reduction in risk.
Perfect negative correlation In contrast, with perfect negative correlation,
the securities’ returns have a perfect inverse linear relationship to each other.
The Components of Portfolio Risk 185
Less than perfect positive correlation Figure 7.4 illustrates a case where stocks
A and D are positively correlated with each other at a level of ρ = +0.55. Inves-
tors may encounter situations such as this and feel there is not much benefit to
be gained from diversifying. Note that the standard deviation of each security is
Rate of return (%)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
Rate of return (%)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
Rate of return (%)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
Stock A Stock C
Portfolio AC
2013 12
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
–12
–10
34
–6
30
12
21.5
–12
36
34
–10
30
–6
12
21.5 0.0
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Av. return
Std. dev.
Stock A Stock CYear Return on portfolio AC
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
FIGURE 7.3 Returns for the years 2013–2018 on two stocks, A and C, and a portfolio consisting of 50 percent A and 50 percent C,
when the correction coefficient is −1.0
Stock D
Rate of return (%)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
Stock A
Rate of return (%)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
Portfolio AD
Rate of return (%)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
2013 36
–12
–10
34
–6
30
12
21.5
25
13
19
28
–35
22
12
21.5
30.5
0.5
4.5
31.0
–20.5
26.0
12.0
18.0
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Av. return
Std. dev.
Stock A Stock DYear Return on portfolio AD
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
FIGURE 7.4 Returns for the years 2013–2018 on two stocks, A and D, and a portfolio consisting of 50 percent A and 50 percent D,
when the correction coefficient is +0.55
Checking Your Understanding 189
The n-Security Case
The two-security case can be generalized to the n-security case. Portfolio risk can
be reduced by combining assets with less than perfect positive correlation. Further-
more, the smaller the positive correlation, the better.
Portfolio risk is a function of each individual security’s risk and the covariances
between the returns on the individual securities. Stated in terms of variance, port-
folio risk is:
p
i
n
i i
i
n
j
n
i j
i j ijw w w2
1
2 2
1 1
(7-13)
where
p
i
2
2
the variance of the portfolio’s return
the variance of security ’s return
the covariance between the ret
i
ij uurns for securities and
the weight invested in secu
i j
w i rrity
a double summation sign since
i
i j n n
i
n
j
n
1 1
1, , ( ))
( ,
comovement terms are added
together i.e. all possible ppairs of values for and excludingi j i j, )
Although Equation 7-13 appears formidable, it states exactly the same message as
Equation 7-12 for the two-stock portfolio; portfolio risk is a function of:
• The weighted risk of each individual security (as measured by its variance)
• The weighted covariances among all pairs of securities
As noted previously, three variables determine portfolio risk: variances, covari-
ances, and weights.
Since the covariance of security i and security j (σij) equals the correlation of
returns for security i and j times the standard deviation of each security, we can
easily report Equation 7-13 using covariance or correlation. Therefore, in general
discussions of portfolio risk, these two comovement terms can be, and are, used
interchangeably.
Checking Your Understanding
5. Correlation and covariance are both measures of comovement. How are the
two measures used and how are they related to one another?
6. Suppose we add a very risky stock to a well-diversified portfolio. Could such an
action lower the portfolio’s risk?
The importance of covariance One of Markowitz’s important contributions to
portfolio theory is his insight about the relative importance of variances and covari-
ances. As highlighted in Figure 7.5, when we add a new security to a large portfolio
of securities, there are two impacts.
1. The asset’s own risk, as measured by its weighted variance, is added to the
portfolio’s risk.
2. Weighted covariances between the new security and every other security
already in the portfolio are also added.
Chapter 7 Portfolio Theory
• As the number of securities held in a portfolio increases, the importance of
each individual security’s risk (variance) decreases, while the importance of
the covariance relationships increases.
For example, in a portfolio of 150 securities, the contribution of each security’s
own risk to the total portfolio risk is extremely small. When a new security is added
to a large portfolio of securities, what matters most is its covariance with the other
securities in the portfolio.
Portfolio risk consists almost entirely of the covariance risk between securities.
Individual security risks are diversified away in a large portfolio, but the covariance
terms are not diversified away and therefore contribute to the risk of the portfolio.
Obtaining the Data
To calculate portfolio risk using Equation 7-13, we need estimates of each security’s
variance and estimates of the correlation coefficients or covariances. Both variances
and covariances can be calculated using either ex post or ex ante data. If an analyst
uses ex post data to calculate the variances and covariances and then uses these esti-
mates in the Markowitz model, the implicit assumption is that the relationship that
existed in the past will continue into the future. If historical data is thought to offer
the best estimate of the expected variances and covariances, it should be used. How-
ever, it must be remembered that measures of variance and covariance change over
time as does the expected return.
Simplifying the Markowitz Calculations
Equation 7-13 illustrates the problem associated with the calculation of portfolio
risk using the Markowitz mean-variance analysis. In the case of two securities, there
are two covariances, and we multiply the weighted covariance term in Equation
7-12 by two since the covariance of A with B is the same as the covariance of B with
A. Therefore, in the case of three securities, there are six covariances, with four
securities, 12 covariances, and so forth. The total number of covariances in the
Markowitz model is calculated as n(n − 1), where n is the number of securities.
Table 7.2 shows the variance–covariance matrix associated with these calcula-
tions. For the case of two securities, there are n2
, or four, total terms in the matrix—
two variances and two covariances. For the case of four securities, there are n2
, or 16
total terms in the matrix—4 variances and 12 covariances. The variance terms are
on the diagonal of the matrix and, in effect, represent the covariance of a security
with itself. Note that the covariance terms above the diagonal are a mirror image of
the covariance terms below the diagonal—that is, each covariance is repeated twice
since σAB is the same as σBA
.
The sum of
the
weighted
risk of each
individual
security
The sum of
the
weighted
covariances
among all
pairs of
securities
Portfolio
risk
FIGURE 7.5 The components of portfolio risk
Summary 191
• The number of covariances in the Markowitz model is based on the calcu-
lation n(n − 1), where n is the number of securities involved. Because the
covariance of A with B is the same as the covariance of B with A, there are
[n(n − 1)]/2 unique covariances.
Obviously, estimating large numbers of covariances quickly becomes a major
problem for model users. Since many institutional investors follow as many as 250 or
300 securities, the number of inputs required may become an impossibility. In fact,
until the basic Markowitz model was simplified in terms of the covariance inputs, it
remained primarily of academic interest.
On a practical basis, analysts are unlikely to be able to directly estimate the large
number of correlations necessary for a complete Markowitz analysis. In his origi-
nal work, Markowitz suggested using the relation of each security to an index as a
means of generating covariances.
Summary
• A security’s expected return must be estimated. Since this is done under con-
ditions of uncertainty, it may not be realized. Risk (or uncertainty) is always
present in the estimation of expected returns for risky assets.
• Probability distributions are used to calculate a security’s expected return.
• The standard deviation or variance of a security’s expected return is a measure
of the security’s risk; therefore, it also incorporates the probabilities used in
calculating the expected return.
• The expected return for a portfolio is a weighted average of the individual
security expected returns.
The Variance–Covariance Matrix Involved in
Calculating the Standard Deviation of a Portfolio
Two securities:
σ1,1 σ1,2
σ2,1 σ2,2
Four securities:
σ1,1 σ1,2 σ1,3 σ1,4
σ2,1 σ2,2 σ2,3 σ2,4
σ3,1 σ3,2 σ3,3 σ3,4
σ4,1 σ4,2 σ4,3 σ4,4
TABLE 7.2
An analyst considering 100 securities must estimate
[100(99)]/2 = 4,950 unique covariances. For 250 securi-
ties, the number is [250(249)]/2 = 31,125 unique covariances.
EXAMPLE 7.9
192 Chapter 7 Portfolio Theory
• Portfolio weights, designated wi, are the percentages of a portfolio’s total funds
that are invested in each security, where the weights sum to 1.0.
• Portfolio risk is not a weighted average of the individual security risks. To cal-
culate portfolio risk, we must take account of the comovements between the
securities’ returns.
• The correlation coefficient is a relative measure of the association between
security returns. It is bounded by +1.0 and −1.0, with 0 representing no asso-
ciation.
• Correlation and covariance are both quantitative measures of comovement,
and either can be used in deriving portfolio risk (portfolio variance).
• Portfolio risk is a function of security variances, covariances, and portfolio
weights.
• Covariance and correlation between security returns determine how much
portfolio risk can be reduced through diversification.
• The risk of a well-diversified portfolio is largely attributable to the impact of
the covariances. When a new security is added to a large portfolio of securities,
what matters most is its covariance with the other securities in the portfolio.
• As the number of securities held in a portfolio increases, the importance of
each individual security’s risk (variance) decreases, while the importance of
the covariance relationships increases.
• The major problem with the Markowitz model is that it requires a full set of
security return covariances in order to calculate portfolio variance.
• The number of covariances in the Markowitz model is n(n − 1); the number of
unique covariances is [n(n − 1)]/2.
