Suppose you are fortunate enough
to receive an inheritance of $1 mil-
lion from a relative. She specifies
that you must invest this money intel-
ligently in financial assets within the
next six months, and not spend it
on consumption, and that you must
be answerable to a trustee who has
the final say on your decisions. You
now face an enviable task—building
a portfolio of stocks, bonds, and so
forth—and you quickly realize that
not only do you not know all the
answers, you do not even know some
of the questions.
Having had a finance course in
college, you learned about risk and return, but now you must really understand
what these terms mean. You have heard some people talk about making a “killing
in the market,” but common sense tells you it cannot be that easy. Like the prospec-
tive investor asked the broker when the latter was showing him the yachts belong-
ing to other brokers, “Where are the customers’ yachts?” Also, you have on several
occasions read about fraudulent investment schemes leaving people broke, but
wiser. And so you realize you have your work cut out for you. You need to identify
the important issues, ask the right questions, and learn the basics about successful
investing.
You can, in fact, construct and manage your portfolio, as the following chapters
show. With a little tenacity, you can be on your way to an intelligent investing pro-
gram because basic knowledge can go a long way. Let’s get started.
Chapter 1 provides the foundation for the study of investments by analyzing what
it is all about. The critically important tradeoff between risk and expected return is
explained, and the major issues that every investor must deal with in making invest-
ment decisions are analyzed.

AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Understand why risk and return are
the two critical components of all
investing decisions.
• Appreciate the scope of investment
decisions and the operating envi-
ronment in which they are made.
• Follow the organization of the
investment decision process as we
progress through the text.

An Overall Perspective on Investing
• In less than two years, from its peak in March 2000, the S&P 500 Index, a
measure of large stocks, subsequently lost about 50 percent of its value. Dur-
ing this period, investors lost about $5 trillion. In 2008–2009, stock market
2 Chapter 1 Understanding Investments
volatility was even greater as the market lost over 50 percent of its value in only
17 months. In only two months in 2011, $3 trillion in stock market wealth dis-
appeared in the United States and $8 trillion globally. With volatility like this,
should investors avoid stocks, particularly for their retirement plans?
• Following the financial crisis of 2008, interest rates on U.S. Treasury secu-
rities dropped to record lows, in some cases close to zero. In 2019, bond
yields for several European countries were negative. Why would investors
continue to invest in these debt securities, sometimes stampeding to invest
in them?
• Stocks have always outperformed Treasury bonds over long periods of time,
such as 30 years. Is this an accurate statement?
• Many company employees with self-directed retirement plans have none of
their funds invested in stocks. Is this smart?
• About two-thirds of all affluent Americans use financial advisers, a percentage
that has been increasing. Will you need one?
• For a recent 10-year period, only 24 percent of professionally managed stock
portfolios were able to outperform the overall stock market. Why?
• How can futures contracts, with a reputation for being extremely risky, be used
to reduce investor risk?
• What is the historical average annual rate of return on common stocks and
bonds? What can an investor reasonably expect to earn from stocks in the
future?
The objective of this text is to help you understand the investments field so that
you can intelligently answer questions such as the preceding and make sound invest-
ment decisions that will enhance your economic welfare and standard of living. The
text also provides an introduction for those considering careers in this rewarding
field. To accomplish this objective, key concepts are presented along with many
real-world examples to provide an appreciation of both the theory and practice of
investments.
Both descriptive and quantitative materials on investing are readily available. In
fact, one of the problems today is information overload with investment material.
Some investment material is very enlightening; however, some of it is worthless. This
text seeks to cover what is particularly useful and relevant for today’s investment cli-
mate. It offers some ideas about what you can reasonably expect to accomplish with
your added knowledge, and therefore what you can realistically expect to achieve
as an investor. Many investors have unrealistic expectations, and this will ultimately
lead to disappointments in investment results—or, worse, the loss of all of their
funds in a fraud or scam.
Just Say NO! Prepare yourself to say NO! Learning how to avoid the many pitfalls
awaiting you as an investor—in particular, investing scams and frauds—by clearly
understanding what you can reasonably expect from investing your money may be
the single most important benefit to be derived from this text. For example, would
you entrust your money to someone offering 36 percent annual return on riskless
Treasury securities? Some 600 investors did and lost some $10 million to a former
Sunday school teacher.
In February 2009, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filed a com-
plaint alleging that R. Allen Stanford and James Davis operated a massive Ponzi
scheme, misappropriating billions of dollars of investors’ money. According to the
complaint, the $8 billion fraud involved certificates of deposit promising overly high
rates of return. The size of this alleged fraud pales in comparison to the Madoff
Establishing a Framework for Investing 3
scandal reported in December 2008, involving a very large Ponzi scheme. Bernard
Madoff admitted that his investment advisor business was a fraud and had been
insolvent for years. Returns were being paid to certain investors out of the principal
received from other investors. The lasting legacy of the Madoff scandal is that many
investors are now focused on safety (return of capital) instead of portfolio growth
(return on capital).
Intelligent investors quickly learn to say no, thereby avoiding many of the pitfalls
that await investors daily. At the very least, you must be prepared to carefully inves-
tigate the investment alternatives that are available to you.
• Remember, there are many financial scams awaiting the unwary. However, you
can easily learn to avoid them.
Establishing a Framework for Investing
Some Definitions
The term investing covers a wide range of activities. It often refers to investing
money in certificates of deposit, bonds, common stocks, or mutual funds. More
knowledgeable investors would include other “paper” assets, such as warrants,
puts and calls, futures contracts, and convertible securities, as well as tangible
assets, such as gold, real estate, and collectibles. Investing encompasses very
conservative positions as well as aggressive speculation. Whether your perspec-
tive is that of a college graduate starting out in the workplace or that of a senior
citizen concerned with finances after retirement, investing decisions are critically
important to most people and contribute substantially to an individual’s quality
of life.
An investment can be defined as the commitment of funds to one or more assets
that will be held over some future time period. Investment management is con-
cerned with the management of an investor’s wealth, which is the sum of current
income and the present value of all future income. Although the field of invest-
ments encompasses many aspects, it can be thought of in terms of two primary func-
tions: analysis and management—hence the title of this text.
Financial assets and marketable securities In this text, the term invest-
ments refers in general to financial assets and in particular to marketable securi-
ties. Financial assets are paper (or electronic) claims on some issuer, such as the
federal government or a corporation, whereas real assets are tangible, physical
assets such as gold, silver, diamonds, art, and real estate. Marketable securities
are financial assets that are easily and inexpensively tradable in organized mar-
kets. Technically, the word investments includes both financial and real assets and
both marketable and nonmarketable assets. Because of the vast scope of invest-
ment opportunities available to investors, our primary emphasis is on marketable
securities; however, the basic principles and techniques discussed in this text are
applicable to real assets.
Even when we limit our discussion primarily to financial assets, it is difficult to
keep up with the proliferation of new products. Assets that did not exist a few years
ago include the many new exchange traded products (ETPs), which are discussed
in a later chapter
A Perspective on Investing
Why Do We Invest?
We invest to make money! Although everyone would agree with this statement, we
need to be more precise. (After all, this is a college textbook and anyone helping
to pay for your education expects more.) We invest to improve our welfare, which
for our purposes can be defined as monetary wealth, both current and future. We
assume that investors are interested only in the monetary benefits to be obtained
from investing, as opposed to such factors as the psychic income to be derived from
impressing one’s friends with demonstrated financial prowess.
Funds to be invested come from assets already owned, borrowed money, and
savings or foregone consumption. By foregoing consumption today and investing
the savings, investors expect to enhance their future consumption possibilities by
increasing their wealth. Do not underestimate the amount of money individuals can
accumulate. According to Spectrem Group’s 2017 Market Insights Report, a record
10.8 million U.S. households had a net worth of more than $1 million, which was an
increase of 400,000 households from the previous year. This success was attributed
to the U.S. economy’s recovery, in combination with the Wall Street rally following
the 2016 election.
Investors also seek to manage their wealth effectively, obtaining the most from
it while protecting it from inflation, taxes, and other factors. To accomplish both
objectives, people invest.
Take a Portfolio Perspective
This text assumes that investors have established their overall financial plan and are
now interested in managing and enhancing their wealth by investing in an optimal
combination of financial assets. The idea of an “optimal combination” is important
because our wealth, which we hold in the form of various assets, should be evalu-
ated and managed as a unified whole. Wealth should be evaluated and managed
within the context of a portfolio, which consists of all assets held by an investor. For
example, if you own four stocks and three mutual funds, that is your portfolio. If
your parents own 23 stocks, some municipal bonds, and some bank CDs, that is their
portfolio of financial assets
Cryptocurrency
What is cryptocurrency? A currency? A great
investment opportunity? A hoax? You are likely
to receive any one of these answers depending
on who you ask. In short, cryptocurrency is digital
money, represented as an encrypted string
of data that is free of governmental oversight.
Blockchain technology is the underlying process
that enables the existence of cryptocurrencies.
Blockchain is a digital, decentralized ledger
that allows for, and keeps a record of, peer-to-
peer transactions across a network without the
need for a centralized third party. Blockchain
technology has the potential to create enor-
mous gains in efficiency and tremendous cost
savings by eliminating the need for a third party
in transactions.
By far the most recognized cryptocurrency is
Bitcoin; however, there are numerous other cryp-
tocurrencies in existence. Some other popular
alternatives include Ethereum, Ripple, Litecoin,
The Importance of Studying Investments 5
The Importance of Studying Investments
The Personal Aspects
It is important to remember that all individuals have wealth of some kind; if noth-
ing else, this wealth may consist of the current and future value of their services in
the marketplace (often referred to as human capital). Most individuals must make
investment decisions sometime in their lives. For example, many employees must
decide the appropriate combination of stocks, bonds, and other assets to hold in
their retirement accounts. And many people try to build wealth during their work-
ing years by investing.
Retirement decisions The lack of retirement savings is a looming crisis of epic
proportions. According to the 2018 Retirement, Income, and Risk report prepared
by the Insured Retirement Institute, over 40 percent of Baby Boomers have no
retirement savings at all, and only 25 percent are confident they will have enough
money to last throughout retirement.
A major revolution in personal finance is to provide employees with self-directed
retirement plans (defined contribution plans rather than defined benefit plans).
Whereas traditional defined-benefit retirement plans guarantee retirees an amount
of money each month, the new emphasis on self-directed retirement plans means
that you will have to choose among stock funds, bond funds, guaranteed invest-
ment contracts, and other alternatives. How much you have available for retirement
depends upon how much you save each month as well as the performance of the
investments you select.
• In 1979, more than 40 percent of workers in the private sector participated in
defined benefit pension plans in which the employer took primary responsi-
bility for directing retirement dollars. By 2018, that number had fallen to only
EOS, and Cardano. When Bitcoin was introduced
in 2009 by Satoshi Nakamoto (a pseudonym), it
was described as a new electronic peer-to-peer
cash system with no server or central authority.
The “crypto” part of the term references the idea
that cryptocurrencies rely on strong cryptography
that prevents a security breach.
As a digital payment system, the advantages
of cryptocurrencies are that they allow for digital
global payments that are fast, secure, irreversible,
pseudonymous, free of government intervention,
and open to any individual that wants to partic-
ipate in the system. One of the recognized flaws
with cryptocurrencies is that they are not backed
by tangible assets or a government entity. Some
of the most renowned investors in history (e.g.,
Boone Pickens, Warren Buffett, and Nouriel
Roubini) have weighed in negatively on Bitcoin
as an investment. The following quote by Jack
Bogle sums up the group’s sentiment, “Avoid
Bitcoin like the plague. Did I make myself clear?”1
Bitcoin experienced a wild price ride between
2013 and 2018, leaving some investors delighted
and others dejected. The price per Bitcoin
advanced from $134 on April 28, 2013, to a high
value of $19,497 on December 16, 2017, before
falling all the way back to $3,743 at the end of
2018. That’s a total return of over 14,000 percent
on the way up and a drop of over 80 percent on
the way down.
6 Chapter 1 Understanding Investments
17 percent, thus, putting much more reliance on defined contribution plans,
which put the onus on the employee. The ultimate success of these plans is
dependent upon the choices made by the employee.
Your choices are many, and your success—or lack thereof—will directly affect
your quality of life in retirement and may dictate whether you are even able to
retire. Therefore, while employees in the past typically did not have to concern
themselves with investing decisions relative to their company’s retirement plan,
employees now must do so. This is a very important personal reason for studying
the subject of investments!
A good example of this revolution in retirement programs is 401(k) plans offered
by many employers, whereby employees contribute a percentage of salary to a tax-
deferred plan, and the employer often matches part of the contribution. Tens of
millions of American workers contribute to 401(k) plans. At the end of 2018, these
and similar tax-advantaged plans held approximately $9.2 trillion in assets. The bulk
of 401(k) assets are invested in stocks; therefore, it is important to know something
about stocks.
To illustrate the critical importance of making good investment decisions,
consider yet another self-directed retirement vehicle, the Individual Retirement
Account (IRA). IRAs are an important method that Americans use to provide for
their retirement. IRA assets totaled approximately $8.2 trillion by 2017, which was
roughly 31 percent of the total U.S. retirement market.
The annual maximum IRA contribution was $5,500 in 2018 ($6,500 for those age
50 and above). IRA funds can be invested in a wide range of assets, from the very
safe to the quite speculative. IRA owners are allowed to have self-directed brokerage
accounts, which offer a wide array of investment opportunities. Since these funds
may be invested for as long as 40 or more years, good investment decisions are criti-
cal, as shown in Example 1.1.
Consider the amount of wealth that can be accumulated by
contributing $5,000 annually to a tax-sheltered account. Over
many years of investing, the differences in results can be staggering. Note that in the
case of a $5,000 annual contribution for 40 years, the payoff at a rate of 15 percent
is almost $9 million. In contrast, at a rate of 10 percent the payoff is $2.21 million,
which is a great outcome but significantly less than almost $9 million. Similarly, if
a 10 percent return can be obtained instead of a 5 percent return, over a period of
40 years the difference approaches a fourfold multiple. Clearly, good investment
decisions, which lead to higher returns, can make a tremendous difference in the
wealth that you accumulate. None other than Albert Einstein is rumored to have said
“compound interest is the most powerful force in the universe.”2
Final dollar wealth if funds are
compounded at
Amount invested
per year Number of years 5% 10% 15%
$5000 20 165,330 286,375 512,218
$5000 30 332,194 822,470 2,173,726
$5000 40 603,999 2,212,963 8,895,452
EXAMPLE 1.1
2 Whether he said it or not is irrelevant. It is still a good motto to live by.
The Importance of Studying Investments 7
Building wealth over your lifetime Beyond the retirement issue, the study
of investments is more important than ever in the 21st century. Individ-
ual investors have swarmed into the financial markets, either by force (becom-
ing part of a self-directed retirement plan) or by choice (seeking higher
returns than those available from financial institutions). In 2017, approximately
56.2 million households in the United States owned mutual funds that invested
in stocks.
Individual investor interest in the stock market is best expressed by the popular-
ity of mutual funds and exchange traded products (explained in Chapter 3), which
are favorite investment vehicles of small investors. With so much individual investor
money flowing into these funds, and with individual investors owning a large per-
centage of all stocks outstanding, the study of investments is more important than
ever.
In the final analysis, we study investments in the hope of creating wealth and
earning better returns in relation to the risk we assume. A careful study of invest-
ment analysis and portfolio management principles can provide a sound framework
for both managing and increasing wealth. Furthermore, a sound study of this sub-
ject matter will allow you to obtain maximum value from the many articles on invest-
ing that appear daily in newspapers and on the Internet, which in turn will increase
your chances of reaching your financial goals.
Investments as a Profession
In addition to the above-mentioned reasons for the importance of studying invest-
ments, the world of investments offers several rewarding careers, both professionally
and financially. A study of investments is an essential part of becoming a profes-
sional in this field.
Investment bankers and traders Investment bankers, who arrange the sale of
new securities as well as assist in mergers and acquisitions, enjoyed phenomenal
financial rewards in the booming 1980s and 1990s. Given the turmoil of 2000–2002,
investment banking business dropped off sharply, and by mid-2002 was the slow-
est part of Wall Street’s business. In 2008, the financial crisis saw the demise of
Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers and the merger of Merrill Lynch with Bank of
America. Furthermore, signaling the end of an era on Wall Street, Goldman Sachs
and Morgan Stanley, the last two major investment banks at the time, became bank
holding companies in order to stay in business.
The 2008 financial crisis ushered in a new wave of government regulation and
resulted in the promotion of “shadow banking” firms, such as hedge funds, private
equity funds, and ETFs. Since the crises, however, investment banking business has
rebounded considerably with advisory fees increasing from a low of $66 billion in
2008 to $74 billion in 2016.
Security analysts and portfolio managers A range of financial institu-
tions, including mutual funds, brokerage firms, and investment bankers as
well as banks and insurance companies, need the services of security analysts
(also called investment analysts). Security analysts are routinely separated
into buy- and sell-side analysts. Sell-side analysts issue recommendations such
as “strong buy” that are published and made available to many investors, while
buy-side analysts prepare research to benefit the firm for whom the research
was prepared.
Security Analysts Market
professionals whose job it
is to evaluate and recom-
mend stocks to individual
and institutional investors
8 Chapter 1 Understanding Investments
Brokerage houses employ sell-side analysts to support their registered represent-
atives who in turn serve the public—for example, preparing the research reports
provided to customers. Investment bankers employ buy-side analysts to assist in the
sale of new securities and in the valuation of firms as possible merger or acquisition
candidates. Other firms that employ buy-side analysts include banks and insurance
companies who own portfolios of securities that must be evaluated in order to be
managed, and mutual funds that need analysts to evaluate securities for possible
purchase or sale.
Financial firms need portfolio managers to manage the portfolios of securities
handled by these organizations. Portfolio managers are responsible for making the
actual portfolio buy and sell decisions—what to buy and sell and when to place
the trade. Portfolio performance is calculated for these managers, and their jobs
depend on their performance measured relative to other managed portfolios and
to market averages.
Stockbrokers and financial advisers What about the registered representa-
tives (stockbrokers) employed in cities across the country? A few superbrokers
earn more than $1 million per year. Of course, the average broker earns much
less, but still the compensation can be quite rewarding. More will be said about
brokers in Chapter 5.
The employment and pay for the various job types associated with Wall Street
tend to be cyclical. While the late 1990s were great years for investors and invest-
ment professionals, the market declines of 2000–2002 brought a new reality, as did
the financial crisis of 2008. Given the tremendous turmoil in the financial markets
in 2008, we have entered a new era of banking, financial institutions, and trading
practices, and the exact structure will take time to unfold.
Finally, the number of financial advisers continues to grow. This area has employ-
ment opportunities for people interested in the investments field. The Bureau
of Labor Statistics expects this job category to grow by 27 percent from 2012 to
2022—much faster than the average for all occupations. As the U.S. population ages
and life expectancies increase, the demand for financial planning services should
increase. Over 60 percent of affluent Americans with a net worth between $100,000
and $1 million now use a financial adviser. For a $1 million portfolio, a typical finan-
cial adviser will charge $10,000 a year. Some charge by the hour, with the hourly rate
in the $150 to $500 range.
Standard credentials do not exist for financial advisers. Internet advisers who
manage $25 million or more must register with the SEC as a Registered Investment
Advisor (RIA). Those managing less than $25 million must register with the state
securities agency in the state where they have their principal place of business. 3
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average financial adviser earned
approximately $90,530 per year in 2016, primarily from commissions for selling
products and from managing clients’ assets for a percentage of the assets under
management (AUM).
Exhibit 1.1 lists three designations that financial advisers and planners may
hold and indicates how they are compensated. Those interested in this field as a
career should seriously consider obtaining one (or more) of these professional
designations.
Understanding the Investment Decision Process 9
The CFA designation Individuals interested in careers in the investments
field, as opposed to financial planning, should consider earning the Chartered
Financial Analyst (CFA) designation. This is a highly respected, global profes-
sional designation for people in the investments area. It serves as an indica-
tion that areas of knowledge relevant to investing have been studied and that
high ethical and professional standards have been recognized and accepted.
Throughout this text, we present questions and problems that are based on the
CFA curriculum.
Understanding the Investment
Decision Process
An organized view of the investment process involves analyzing the basic nature of
investment decisions and organizing the activities in the decision process.
Common stocks have produced, on average, significantly larger returns than sav-
ings accounts or bonds. Therefore, should not all investors invest heavily in com-
mon stocks and realize these larger returns? The answer to this question is “To
pursue higher returns, investors must assume larger risks, which is not always pru-
dent.” Underlying all investment decisions is the tradeoff between risk and expected
return.
The Basis of Investment Decisions—Return and Risk
Return Why invest? Stated in the simplest terms, investors wish to earn a return on
their money. Cash has an opportunity cost: By holding cash, you forego the oppor-
tunity to earn a return on that cash. Furthermore, in an inflationary environment,
the purchasing power of cash diminishes at a rapid pace.
Chartered Financial Ana-
lyst (CFA) A professional
designation for people in
the investment field.
10 Chapter 1 Understanding Investments
Expected return versus realized return It is critical to distinguish between an
expected return (the anticipated return for some future period) and a realized
return (the actual return over some past period). Investors invest for the future—
for the returns they expect to earn—but when the investing period is over, they are
left with their realized returns. What investors actually earn from their holdings may
turn out to be more or less than what they expected to earn when they initiated the
investment. This point is the essence of the investment process: Investors should
always consider the risk involved in investing.
Properly stated, investors seek to maximize their returns from investing, subject
to the risk they are willing to incur. Therefore, we must consider the other side of
the coin from return, which is risk.
Risk Investors like their returns to be as large as possible; however, this objective
is subject to constraints, primarily risk. 4 The stock market enjoyed the five great-
est consecutive years of returns in its history during 1995–1999, with returns each
year in excess of 20 percent. Nevertheless, several professionally managed funds
performed poorly, with some managing to lose money in one or more of those
years. During the next three years, however, the annual market return was nega-
tive and the average was a loss of more than 14 percent per year. Furthermore, the
market lost more than 36 percent in 2008, while gaining more than 32 percent in
2013. Finally, 2017 saw the market appreciate by nearly 22 percent, whereas the
Expected Return The ex
ante return expected by
investors over some future
holding period
Realized Return Actual
return on an investment
over some previous period
Investments Intuition
The stock market suffered sharp declines during
2000–2002 because of the collapse of tech-
nology stocks. The collapse was so severe that
the technology-heavy NASDAQ stock index
did not reach the levels it attained prior to the
collapse until spring 2015, more than 15 years
later. However, if investors had bought Apple or
Amazon after the collapse, they would have
done extremely well over the next 17 years. Why
didn’t more investors buy these stocks? The
reason is that at the time the risk was thought
to be too great, not only for these stocks, but for
stocks in general. And therein lies the story of
investing. There are great opportunities, but there
are also large risks.
investments Intuition
Investors buy, hold, and sell financial assets
to earn returns on them. Within the spectrum
of financial assets, why do some people buy
common stocks instead of safely depositing
their money in an insured savings account or a
U.S. savings bond, which provides a guaranteed
minimum return? The answer is that they are
trying to earn returns larger than those available
from safer assets. They know they are taking a
greater risk of losing some of their money by buy-
ing common stocks, but they expect to earn a
greater return.
Understanding the Investment Decision Process 11
market was off nearly 5 percent in 2018. As these examples show, the investment
decision must always be considered in terms of both risk and return. The two are
inseparable.
There are different types, and therefore different definitions, of risk. Risk is
defined here as the uncertainty about the actual return that will be earned on an
investment. When we invest, we do so on the basis of an expected return, but there
is a risk that the outcome from the investment—the actual (realized) return—will
differ from what we expected when we made the investment.
Defining risk in this manner, the return on a Treasury bill has no practical risk
because there is little chance that the U.S. government will fail to redeem these
obligations when they mature. In contrast, there is some risk that General Electric,
a company in business for more than 100 years, will be unable to redeem an issue of
30-year bonds when they mature. And there is a substantial risk of not realizing the
expected return on any particular common stock over some future holding period,
such as a year, a month, or even a day.
As we shall see in Chapter 7, Harry Markowitz changed the study of investments
in a significant manner by quantifying portfolio risk as a statistical measure, the vari-
ance or standard deviation. His insight allows us to assess the risk that a purchased
asset will add to an investor’s portfolio.
Investors are risk-averse! It is easy to say that investors dislike risk, but more
precisely, we should say that investors are risk-averse. A risk-averse investor will not
assume risk simply for its own sake and will not incur risk unless there is an expecta-
tion of adequate compensation for doing so.
• Note carefully that it is not irrational to assume risk, even very large risk, as
long as we expect to be compensated for it.
Investors cannot reasonably expect to earn larger returns without assuming
larger risks. Furthermore, it is possible that some investors, perhaps unwittingly,
act in a manner that is too risk-averse, thereby severely diminishing their final
accumulated wealth. There is an old investment adage that says “You can eat
Risk The chance that
the realized return on an
investment will differ from
the expected return
Risk-Averse Investor An
investor who will not
assume risk unless there is
an expectation of compen-
sation for doing so
Concepts in Action
Returns and Risk
Investors enjoyed the best five consecutive years
in stock market history over the period 1995–1999.
They thought they were truly in the golden age of
money making, and in fact, they were. This great
performance came to an end with negative
returns experienced in 2000, 2001, and 2002. Such
is the nature of stock market returns and risk!
Or consider an individual company and its
risk to investors. In early 2000, Cisco, the Internet
products company, had a market cap of $550
billion and was the world’s most valuable
company. In the prior five years, Cisco’s stock
price climbed 35-fold to over $80/share, and
its revenues advanced by 40 percent per year.
Then, the Internet crash occurred. From 2000 to
2002, Cisco’s stock price declined by 90 percent,
reaching a low of less than $10/share. At the
end of 2018, Cisco’s stock price was still nearly 20
percent below its tech-bubble high, even though
its earnings per share (EPS) had increased over
fivefold. Such is the nature of stock risk!
12 Chapter 1 Understanding Investments
well or you can sleep well.” Investing in high-risk and high-reward securities
will offer the potential for you to eat well, but the risky nature of these securi-
ties might prevent you from sleeping at night. However, if you invest in low-risk
securities, you may sleep at night but find that your low returns do not provide
for your needs.
Investor’s risk tolerance Investors deal with risk by choosing the amount of risk
they are willing to incur—that is, they decide their risk tolerance. Some investors
choose to incur high risk levels with the expectation of high levels of return. Other
investors assume much less risk and should not expect to earn large returns.
Can we say that investors, in general, will choose to minimize their risks? No! The
reason is that there are costs to minimizing the risk, specifically a lower expected
return. Taken to its logical conclusion, the minimization of risk would result in
everyone holding risk-free assets such as savings accounts and Treasury bills. The
intelligent way to think about return and risk is this:
• Investors decide on their risk tolerance—how much risk they are willing to
assume when investing. They then seek to maximize their returns subject to
this risk tolerance constraint and any other constraints that might apply (e.g.,
taxes).
Of course, investors’ risk tolerance changes as conditions change. With all the
instant communications now available, this can and does happen quickly. Too often,
individual investors change their risk tolerance at precisely the wrong time. They
become more risk-averse after market declines and less risk-averse after market
advances. This is the opposite of the advice given by famed investor Warren Buffett
who advises investors to “be fearful when others are greedy and greedy when others
are fearful.”
To put these two criteria together, we need to think in terms of the risk-expected
return tradeoff that results from the direct relationship between the risk and the
expected return of an investment. We do this in the following section.
Risk Tolerance An inves-
tor’s willingness to accept
risk when investing
According to Gallup’s 2018 Annual Economy and
Personal Finance survey, only 37 percent of those under
age 35 hold common stock. In contrast, 61 percent of individuals older
than 35 hold stock. Given that stocks have almost always outperformed
other asset classes over long periods, is this a case of young people being too
risk-averse?
EXAMPLE 1.2
Based on news reports, 2016 was a record year for global
economic uncertainty due to major events such as the
U.S. election, escalating tensions in the Middle East, and the Brexit vote. As a
result, investors lost their appetite for stocks. The U.S. equity market, however,
rebounded and posted a large gain of more than 21 percent in 2017. At this
point, many investors were on the sidelines and only later realized they had
indeed overreacted to earlier events
Understanding the Investment Decision Process 13
The risk-expected return tradeoff Within the realm of financial assets, inves-
tors can achieve virtually any position on a risk-expected return spectrum such
as that depicted in Figure 1.1. The line RF to B is the assumed tradeoff between
expected return and risk that exists for investors interested in financial assets. This
tradeoff always slopes upward because the vertical axis is expected return, and
rational investors will not assume more risk unless they expect to be compen-
sated. The expected return should be large enough to compensate for assuming
the additional risk; however, there is no guarantee that the additional returns will
be realized.
RF in Figure 1.1 is the return on a risk-free asset such as a Treasury security, which
has no default risk. This risk-free rate of return, which is available to all investors, is
designated as RF throughout the text.
Figure 1.1 shows approximate relative positions for some of the financial assets
that are discussed in Chapter 2. As we move from risk-free Treasury securities to
more risky corporate bonds, equities, and so forth, we assume more risk in the
expectation of earning a larger return. The common stock of large, blue chip com-
panies is risky, in relation to bonds, but these securities are not as risky as a purchase
of the common stock of small, speculative firms.
Obviously, Figure 1.1 depicts broad categories. Within a particular category, such
as large firm common stocks, a wide range of expected return and risk opportuni-
ties exist at any time.
The important point in Figure 1.1 is the tradeoff between risk and expected
return that should prevail in a rational environment. Investors unwilling to assume
risk must be satisfied with the risk-free rate of return, RF. If they wish to try to earn
a larger rate of return, they must be willing to assume a larger risk as represented by
moving up the risk-expected return tradeoff into more speculative assets. In effect,
Risk-Free Rate of
Return The return on a
riskless asset, often prox-
ied by the rate of return
on Treasury securities
Some Practical Advice
You can find a number of websites with a set of
questions designed to help you assess your risk
tolerance. One such site is http://njaes.rutgers.
edu/money/riskquiz/. Also see http://www.
morningstar.co.uk/uk/655/articles/98540/
a-guide-to-assessing-your-risk-tolerance.aspx.
Risk
Corporate
bonds
Private
equity
B
Large firm
common
stocks
Small firm
common
stocks
RF
Expected return
FIGURE 1.1 The risk-expected return tradeoff available to investors
Important Considerations in the Investment Decision-Making Process 15
hunches, suggestions from friends, and recommendations from brokers—all of
which can be dangerous to one’s financial health.
Portfolio management The other major component of the decision process is
portfolio management. After securities are evaluated, a portfolio is constructed.
Concepts on why and how to build a portfolio are well established. Much of the
work in this area is in the form of mathematical and statistical models, which have
revolutionized both the practice and study of investments over the past 50 years.
Having built a portfolio, the astute investor must consider how and when to revise
it. And, of course, portfolios must be managed on a continuing basis.
Finally, all investors are interested in how well their portfolio performs. This is
the bottom line of the investment process. Measuring portfolio performance is an
inexact procedure, even today, and needs to be carefully considered.
Important Considerations in the
Investment Decision-Making Process
Investors should be aware that the investment decision process can be lengthy and
involved. Regardless of individual actions, however, certain factors in the investment
environment affect all investors. These factors are relevant to investors as they work
through the investment decision-making process.
The Great Unknown
When describing the investment decision-making process, the late esteemed econo-
mist Peter Bernstein stated, “You have to understand that being wrong is part of the
process.” The first, and paramount, factor that all investors must come to grips with
is uncertainty. Investors buy financial assets with a formulated return expectation
over some future holding period. These returns are seldom realized.
• The simple fact that dominates investing, although many investors do not
appreciate it fully, is that realized return on a risky asset often differs from
what was expected—sometimes quite dramatically.
At best, estimates are imprecise; at worst, they are completely wrong. The best
one can do is make the most informed risk and return estimates, act on them, and
be prepared for shifting circumstances. Regardless of how careful and informed
investors are, the future is uncertain, and mistakes will be made.
• All investors, individuals as well as professionals, make investing mistakes.
Anyone can tell you what you should have bought or sold in the past. No one,
however, can guarantee you a successful portfolio for a future period because no
The years 2000–2002 each showed negative returns for
the major stock indexes, as did 2008 and 2018. For large
company stocks, those were the only negative return years since 1990. While
investors expected the returns for those years to be positive at the outset, they
turned out to be years with negative returns.
16 Chapter 1 Understanding Investments
one can consistently forecast what will happen in the financial markets, including
those professionals who are paid to make recommendations. Consider the following
November 2016 quotes:
If Trump wins we should expect a big markdown in expected future earnings for a wide range of
stocks–and a likely crash in the broader market.
Eric Zitzewitz, former chief economist at the IMF.
It really does now look like President Donald J. Trump, and markets are plunging. When might
we expect them to recover? A first-pass answer is never . . . So we are probably looking at a global
recession, with no end in sight.
Paul Krugman, Nobel Prize-winning economist.
Although the future is uncertain, it is manageable, and a thorough understand-
ing of the basic principles of investing will allow investors to cope intelligently. Inves-
tors should always apply sound judgment in making investment decisions. Panic
trading based on emotion can be devastating to one’s wealth.
A Global Perspective
Now more than ever, investors must think of investments in a global context. The
investing environment has changed dramatically as the world’s economies have
become more integrated. The United States no longer accounts for a majority of
stock market capitalization globally, as it did in the past.
• U.S. stocks now account for about 40 percent of the world’s total stock market
capitalization.
A global marketplace of round-the-clock investing opportunities is emerging.
Despite having a large home country bias, U.S. investors are becoming increasingly
comfortable owning the securities of non-U.S. companies.
Why should today’s investors be actively interested in international investing?
The relative valuation levels of many foreign markets are often more attractive than
the U.S. market. For example, as of January 2018, the major U.S. index, the S&P 500
sold at a P/E ratio (P/E ratios are explained in Chapter 2) of 20.0. Major indices in
Hong Kong, China, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom sold at P/E ratios
of 13.3, 15.6, 15.7, 14.6, and 15.6, respectively. This indicates that shares of many
foreign stocks were discounted relative to their U.S. counterparts.
Many U.S. companies now derive a very large percentage of their revenues from
abroad. Consider some of the 100 largest multinational corporations headquartered
in the United States. In 2018, ExxonMobil and Hewlett Packard each earned about
65 percent of its revenues from abroad, while some 58 percent of Coca-Cola’s rev-
enues came from abroad. Alphabet was getting about 54 percent of its revenues out-
side the United States. Thus, U.S. investors holding what traditionally are thought
of as classic American companies are vitally affected by what happens abroad. Of
course, not all large corporations are affected to this extent. Retailing behemoth
Walmart receives only about 24 percent of its revenues from abroad.
From an investing standpoint, the real importance of adding foreign securities is
that investors can achieve beneficial risk reduction if foreign markets move differ-
ently from U.S. markets. For example, when U.S. stocks perform poorly, some for-
eign stocks may do well, which would help offset the poor U.S. performance. This
reduction in portfolio risk is a result of diversification, a very important concept in
investing, which we analyze in Chapter 7. Past studies have shown that portfolios
Important Considerations in the Investment Decision-Making Process 17
consisting of U.S. stocks and foreign stocks provided performance comparable to
either investment individually, and did so with less risk.
When making investment decisions, investors should consider foreign markets as
well as the U.S. financial environment. We do so throughout this text as an integral
part of the discussion, rather than as a separate chapter. Although the technical
details may vary, the principles of investing are applicable to financial assets and
financial markets wherever they exist.
While it may be a smart play, foreign investing does not ensure success because of
the first issue we discussed—the great unknown. As in any other area of investing,
the experts are often wrong. Furthermore, as economies around the world become
more integrated, markets become more similar than dissimilar.
The Importance of the Internet
Any discussion of the investment decision process must highlight the role of the
Internet, which in a short time has significantly changed the investment environ-
ment. Now, investors can access a wealth of investment information, trade inexpen-
sively and quickly through online brokerage accounts, obtain real-time quotes, and
track portfolio performance.
This is a true revolution—the Internet has democratized the flow of investment
information. Any investor, at home, at work, or on vacation, can download an incred-
ible array of information, share comments with other investors, perform security
analysis, manage portfolios, check company required filings, and carry out numerous
other activities not thought possible for an individual investor only a few years ago.
While some of these information sources and/or services carry a fee, most of it is free.
While more information is available, much of it is misleading at best, and out-
right fraudulent at worst. One of the goals of this book is to help you discern which
sources are reliable and which sources should be avoided.
Individual Investors Versus Institutional Investors
There are two broad categories of investors: individual investors and institutional
investors. The latter group, consisting of bank trust departments, pension funds,
Some Practical Advice
U.S. investors are regularly advised to diver-
sify their portfolios by investing globally. Prior to
the advent of global stock mutual funds and
exchange traded funds, this was a difficult task.
Now investors can easily invest in funds that are
diversified across many countries and geo-
graphic regions or are concentrated in the secu-
rities of one country. Investors can, for instance,
choose to invest in the Vanguard FTSE All-World
ex US Index Fund (symbol: VEU). This fund invests
in the stocks of companies located in both
developing and emerging markets outside of the
United States. Alternatively, investors can choose
funds such as the Dreyfus Brazil Equity Fund
(symbol: DBZAX) that invests solely in Brazilian
companies.
U.S. investors are regularly advised to diver-
sify their portfolios by investing globally. Such
activity can be heavily influenced by the dollar’s
value relative to other currencies. Recent pur-
chases by U.S. investors of foreign shares have
been heavy. Such activity is influenced by a
projected decline in the dollar, which would
increase returns to U.S. investors in dollar terms
(as explained in Chapter 6). Intelligent investors
pay attention to what is happening on a global
basis, and not simply what is happening in the
United States.
18 Chapter 1 Understanding Investments
mutual funds, insurance companies, and so forth, includes the professional money
managers, who are often publicized in the popular press. Institutional investors in
the United States hold trillions of dollars worth of assets.
Institutional investors have a dual relationship with individual investors. On the
one hand, individuals are the indirect beneficiaries of institutional investor actions
because they own or benefit from these institutions’ portfolios. On a daily basis,
however, they are “competing” with these institutions in the sense that both are
managing portfolios of securities and attempting to do well financially by buying
and selling securities.
Institutional investors are indeed the “professional” investors, with vast resources
at their command. In the past, they were often treated differently from individual
investors because companies often disclosed important information selectively to
some institutional investors. However, this situation changed significantly in Octo-
ber 2000 when Regulation FD (Full Disclosure) took place.
Regulation FD, which applies to almost all public companies, regulates commu-
nications between public companies and investment professionals. Companies are
now prohibited from (intentionally) disclosing material, nonpublic information to
specific types of investment professionals unless the company simultaneously pub-
licly discloses the information. Regulation FD and other security regulations are
discussed more fully in Chapter 5.
Some individual investors consistently beat institutional investors due to either
superior skill and insight, or luck. Furthermore, some opportunities can be exploited
more easily by individual investors than by institutional investors. As an example, for
a multibillion dollar fund to benefit from identifying an undervalued stock, it must
purchase many thousands of company shares. As it purchases the shares, the stock
price is driven up, and the firm has to pay higher and higher prices for the stock.
Individual investors, on the contrary, take much smaller positions, and their trades
do not move the market price.
Individual investors are now on a more competitive basis with institutional inves-
tors, given the information they can access from the Internet and the low cost of
transacting. We should expect the market to be more efficient today relative to the
past because information is even more quickly and freely available. However, given
recent stock market volatility, it may be that investors are misinterpreting and/or
overreacting to aspects of this information flow. The question of how well individual
investors perform relative to institutional investors raises the issue of market effi-
ciency, which we consider in Chapter 12.
Regulation FD Regulates
communications between
public companies and
investment professionals
Investors have often sought out emerging markets as an
investing opportunity on the basis that these economies
may perform differently from the industrialized economies, thereby providing
some offset in case of declines in industrialized market prices. However, this
view is now less certain. Consider the following quote from the head of global
credit at a firm managing more than $200 billion in fixed-income investments:
“People often make the argument about decoupling (that emerging markets
can rise as developed markets fall), but then they start to realize—wait a second,
it’s one big interconnected world.”6
EXAMPLE 1.5
6 Neil Shah, “Institutions Hit by Emerging Bets,” The Wall Street Journal, September 26, 2011, p. c2.
Important Considerations in the Investment Decision-Making Process 19
Ethics in Investing
Today, perhaps more than ever, investors need to stop and think about ethical issues
as they apply to investing. Corporate scandals involving Bernard Madoff Invest-
ments, Enron, WorldCom, HealthSouth, and so forth were prominently in the news
as executives from these firms went on trial and were charged with fraud in con-
nection with the companies’ financial activities. Insider trading cases have been a
dominant focus of regulators and cases involving employees of SAC Capital, Martha
Stewart, and the Galleon Group have dominated the headlines. Other recent nega-
tive headlines involving ethical issues include the conflicts of interest with security
analysts and the role of high-frequency trading in providing a few investors with
unfair trading advantages.
Financial markets depend on integrity in the process, whether it be from CEOs,
brokers, stock exchange employees, security analysts, or managers of mutual
funds. If investors lose confidence in the overall fairness of the investing envi-
ronment, financial markets could be severely damaged, and this in turn could
adversely impact the capital formation process that is so vital to the success of the
U.S. economy.
Because of the overall importance of ethics in the investing process, we examine
ethical issues in several chapters. In some cases, as in the next example, we do not
provide a clear answer to the issue raised. In other examples, we offer some guid-
ance on the issue. This is consistent with the real-life nature of ethical issues, where
it is not always easy to identify the correct course of action.
20 Chapter 1 Understanding Investments
Checking Your Understanding
5. Individual investors make investing decisions under conditions of uncer-
tainty, while professional investors make such decisions under conditions of
controlled risk taking, thereby eliminating the uncertainty. Agree or disagree
and explain your reasoning.
6. A chance for larger returns than those available domestically is the primary
reason U.S. investors should hold foreign securities. Agree or disagree and
explain your reasoning.
Organizing the Text
Four chapters of background material follow this introductory chapter to form Part
1. The financial assets available to investors—both from direct investing and indi-
rect investing—are examined in separate chapters, followed by a discussion of the
securities markets in which they trade. This, in turn, is followed by an analysis of how
securities are actually traded.
Part 2 deals with the important issues of risk and return, which underlie all invest-
ment decisions. Chapter 6 covers historical returns from securities, along with the
risk involved. Investors must understand the results of investing in major assets,
such as stocks and bonds, if they are to make intelligent estimates of future perfor-
mance. Chapter 7 deals with the estimation of risk and return, and discusses the
important principles of Markowitz portfolio theory. Chapter 8 continues the discus-
sion of portfolio theory, explaining how an efficient portfolio is selected. Chapter 9
discusses capital market theory, which pertains to asset pricing models.
Nine chapters of the text, involving Parts 3–5, are devoted to evaluating the pri-
mary financial assets, stocks, and bonds, and explaining the basics of asset valuation.
Common stocks are analyzed in Part 3, which includes two chapters. Valuation tech-
niques are discussed in the first of the two chapters, and analysis and management
Ethics in Investing
The Case of Martha Stewart
The SEC filed securities fraud charges against
Martha Stewart and her stockbroker in 2003.
Stewart became entangled in this matter as a
result of selling her stock in ImClone Systems
after allegedly receiving an unlawful tip from
her broker. The SEC also alleged that Stewart
and her broker created an alibi for Stewart’s
sales and concealed important facts during the
investigation. An SEC official stated that “[t]he
Commission simply cannot allow corporate exec-
utives or industry professionals to profit illegally
from their access to nonpublic information. The
coordinated action announced today by the U.S.
Attorney’s Office shows that the consequences
for those individuals will be even greater if we
uncover evidence that they obstructed our
investigation.”
Stewart was forced to resign as an officer and
director of her company, and was sentenced to
five months in prison and two years’ probation, in
addition to a fine of $30,000. Contrary to popular
belief, Stewart was not charged with insider
trading, but rather with obstruction of justice.
Although many people seem to believe
otherwise, she maintained throughout the pro-
ceedings that she had done nothing wrong. In
this situation, would it have been appropriate
for her to admit guilt in exchange for a reduced
sentence?
in the second. A chapter on market efficiency is included because this important
concept affects the strategies followed in selecting and managing a portfolio.
Because of the complexity of common stocks, four additional chapters are
needed to describe the basics of security analysis. Part 4 is purposefully sequenced
from market to industry to company analysis, followed by a discussion of technical
analysis.
Part 5 covers bonds, using the same format as Part 3. Chapter 17 covers the prin-
ciples of bond valuation, and Chapter 18 covers the analysis and management of
bonds.
Part 6 contains a basic analysis of alternative investment opportunities involving
derivative securities. Separate chapters cover options and futures.
Part 7 contains two chapters covering the portfolio management process. Chap-
ter 21 describes some of the issues that investors face in their financial planning
and how they can proceed to manage their financial assets. The text concludes in
Chapter 22, with the logical capstone to a study of investments, the measurement of
portfolio performance.
Summary
• An investment is the commitment of funds to one or more assets that will be
held over some future period. The field of investment management involves
the management of investor wealth.
• The investment opportunities considered in this text consist of a wide array
of financial assets (primarily marketable securities), which are financial claims
on some issuer.
• The basic element of all investment decisions is the tradeoff between risk and
expected return. Financial assets are arrayed along an upward-sloping risk-
expected return tradeoff, with the risk-free return (RF) as the vertical axis
intercept.
• Expected return and risk are directly related; the greater (smaller) the
expected return, the greater (smaller) the risk.
• Investors seek to maximize expected returns subject to constraints, primarily risk.
• Risk is defined as the chance that the realized return on an investment will
differ from its expected return.
• Rational investors are risk-averse, meaning that they are unwilling to assume
risk unless they expect to be adequately compensated. The study of invest-
ments is based on the premise that investors act rationally.
• Investors deal with risk by choosing (implicitly or explicitly) the amount of risk
they are willing to incur—that is, they decide their risk tolerance.
• For organizational purposes, the investment decision process has traditionally
been divided into two broad steps: security analysis and portfolio management.
• Security analysis is concerned with the valuation of securities. Valuation, in
turn, is a function of risk and expected return.
• Portfolio management encompasses building an optimal portfolio for an
investor. Considerations include initial portfolio construction, revision, and
the evaluation of portfolio performance.
• Major factors affecting the investment management process include uncer-
tainty in investment decisions, the global nature of investing, the increasing
importance of the Internet, the role of institutional investors in the market-
place, and ethical issues in investing.