347CHAPTER 13
It is apparent to most everyone that a
poorly performing economy does not
bode well for stocks. The recession
that started in 2001 corresponded
with a severe stock market decline
that occurred during 2000–2002.
Likewise, the December 2007–June
2009 recession was associated with
the dramatic market decline in 2008.
Clearly, to be a successful investor, it is
worthwhile to know something about
the overall tone of the economy and
at least be able to intelligently con-
sider investment strategies that incor-
porate economic conditions.
The recognized importance of the economy in investment management man-
ifests itself in the widespread use of the top-down approach to security analysis.
Evaluating conditions in the overall economy is the starting point in the top-down
approach because it recognizes the crucial role that the economy plays in determin-
ing stock returns.
Exhibit 13.1 illustrates the top-down approach to fundamental security analysis,
which is covered in Chapters 13–15.
Introduction
To be successful, investors need to make intelligent judgments about the current
state of the financial markets and likely future changes. Are specific markets at unu-
sually high or low levels, and what are they likely to do in the next year or next few
years? Understanding the current and future condition of the economy is the first
step in a top-down analysis.
In this chapter, we apply the valuation concepts discussed in Chapter 10 to under-
standing the aggregate stock market. We also consider forecasts of changes in the
stock market. Although investors cannot possibly hope to be consistently correct in their stock
market forecasts, they can expect to make intelligent inferences about major trends
in the market. Because of the market’s impact on investor success, investors should
consider the market’s likely future direction.
Economy/Market Analysis
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER YOU
WILL BE ABLE TO:
• Understand the relationship
between the stock market and
the economy.
• Analyze conceptually the determi-
nants of the stock market.
• Make some basic forecasts of
possible changes in the level of the
market
Chapter 13 Economy/Market Analysis
Taking a Global Perspective
U.S. investors can choose equities from numerous countries. Foreign equities com-
prise approximately two-thirds of the world’s market capitalization. Therefore,
investors should think about global economies when forming and managing their
portfolios.
Multinational corporations have often led in restructuring traditional processes
and embracing new technologies. Therefore, as a general rule, the analysis we
consider in this chapter applies to the United States and other countries as well.
Foreign equity markets are driven by earnings growth and interest rate changes, just
as U.S. markets are. By understanding the U.S. equity markets, investors are in a bet-
ter position to understand foreign equity markets despite the cultural, economic,
and political differences that exist.
Another reason why investors must consider the global perspective is currency
changes. In early 2009, the euro value was approximately $1.3; however, since then
it fluctuated between a low of $1.1 and a high of $1.5. It began 2019 near its 10-year
low value of $1.1. Thus, over this 10-year period, the currency exchange rate has
fluctuated by over 36 percent between its high and low rates. The wide swings in
currency values have a large impact on the returns from foreign investments. U.S.
investors in foreign securities benefit when the dollar declines relative to the respec-
tive foreign currency but are harmed when the dollar appreciates.
Assessing the Economy
A basic measure of economic activity is gross domestic product (GDP), which is
defined as the market value of final goods and services produced by an economy for
some time period (typically a year). It consists of the sum of consumption spending,
investment spending, government spending, and net exports. Consumption now
comprises 70 percent or more of GDP.
Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) A measure of a
country’s output occur-
ring within its borders by
nationals and foreigners
Analyze the economy/market
Focus on sectors/industries that appear attractive
Analyze and value individual companies
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
EXHIBIT 13.1 | The Top-Down Approach to Fundamental Security
Assessing the Economy 349
GDP measures the value of goods and services produced within a country’s
borders even if they are produced by foreign entities. In contrast, gross national
product (GNP) is the value of goods and services produced by domestic entities
even if they occur outside the country. Thus, the value of goods produced by
foreign-owned businesses on U.S. land is part of U.S. GDP but not part of U.S. GNP.
In contrast, profit earned on a foreign investment by a U.S. resident is part of U.S.
GNP but not part of U.S. GDP.
Most analysts believe that GDP more accurately reflects the health of an economy,
and thus, GDP tends to receive more attention from economists than GNP. GDP
numbers are prepared quarterly and released a few weeks following the end of the
quarter. GDP constitutes a basic measure of the economic health and strength of the
economy. GDP can be measured on both a nominal and real (inflation-adjusted)
basis. Figure 13.1 shows the annual percent change for real GDP since 1994. Note
real growth hovered around three percent until 2000, but has been more volatile
and at a lower level since. The impact of the recessions of 2001 and 2008–2009 are
clearly visible in the figure.
• Real GDP is the single best measure of overall economic activity.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis releases an advance estimate of quarterly GDP
in the first month following quarter end. In the second month, it provides a prelimi-
nary estimate, and in the third month, it provides a final estimate (however, even
this estimate is subject to annual revisions). 1 The average revision of GDP growth
from the advance to the final estimate has been about 2/3 of a percentage point. It
should be noted that almost 90 percent of the time the advance estimate correctly
predicts the direction of quarterly change in real GDP growth.
Investors are very concerned about whether the economy is experiencing an
expansion or a contraction because employment, interest rates, and inflation are
clearly affected. Of more immediate interest to investors, GDP changes directly
affect company financials. The mechanism with respect to stock prices is relatively
straightforward—if growth in GDP slows, as it did by the end of 2000 and 2007, cor-
porate revenues and profits slow. The stock market reacts negatively to the prospect
of diminished economic activity.
Gross National Product
(GNP) A measure of
the output of a country’s
citizens on their land or
foreign land
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Percent change
Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
FIGURE 13.1 Percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP)
Source: Data was obtained from the Federal Reserve website, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/.
1 This discussion is based on Abbigail J. Chiodo and Michael T. Owyang, “Subject to Revision,” National
Economic Trends, The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, June 2002, p. 1.
350 Chapter 13 Economy/Market Analysis
• The recurring pattern of expansion and contraction in economic activity is
referred to as the business cycle.
The Business Cycle
The business cycle reflects movements in economic activity as a whole; however,
economic activity is comprised of many diverse parts. The diversity of parts ensures
that business cycles are unique. However, cycles do have a common framework,
with a beginning (they start from a trough), followed by a peak, and ending with a
new trough. Thus, economic activity starts in depressed conditions, builds up in the
expansionary phase, and ends in a downturn, only to start again. The word “trough”
is used to indicate when the economy has hit bottom.
• The period from a peak to a trough is a recession.
• The period from a trough to a peak is an expansion.
The typical U.S. business cycle since the end of World War II (WWII) consists
of an expansion averaging about 60 months. Contractions since the war average
about 10 months in duration. Obviously, however, these are only averages, and
we cannot rely on them exclusively to interpret current or future situations. For
example, the March 1991 expansion became the longest peacetime expansion,
when it ended in March 2001. However, the current expansion, which started
in June 2009, has surpassed that mark since it is still ongoing as of this writing.
Business cycles cannot be neatly categorized as to length and turning points when
they are occurring; only in hindsight can such precise distinctions be made. The
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), a private nonprofit organiza-
tion, measures business cycles and officially decides on the economic “turning
points,” the dates at which the economy goes from an expansion mode to a con-
traction mode, and vice versa. 2
• Business cycle turning points are typically determined well after the fact, so
observers do not know on a current basis when a peak or trough has been
reached.
Business Cycle The recur-
ring patterns of expansion
and contraction in the
economy
Some Practical Advice
What exactly is the definition of a recession,
and how do we know when we are in one? This
was a hotly debated topic in early 2008 as the
economy appeared to be weakening rapidly.
A commonly accepted definition of a reces-
sion among the general public is two con-
secutive quarters in which real GDP declines.
However, the NBER defines a recession as a
“significant decline in activity spread across
the economy, lasting more than a few months,
visible in industrial production, real income, and
wholesale–retail sales.” The official declaration
that a recession has occurred comes from the
NBER’s dating committee. Unfortunately, in either
case you won’t know about it until after it has
started. With the GDP definition, you must wait
until the data for the two consecutive quar-
ters have been released. In the NBER case, the
committee usually declares that a recession
has started some 6–18 months after economic
activity has peaked (it took 12 months in the
case of the 2008 recession).
Standard practice is to separate economic indicators into three categories: lead-
ing, coincident, and lagging. Composite economic indexes are formed for each
of the three categories. The leading indicators tend to move prior to a transition
in economic conditions and consist of variables such as stock prices, an index of
consumer expectations, money supply, and interest rate spreads. The coincident
indicators consist of four variables, including industrial production, employment
figures, manufacturing activity, and trade sales. The lagging indicators move after
economic activity and consist of seven variables such as duration of unemployment,
bank prime rate, labor costs, and commercial and industrial loans outstanding.3
The intent of using composite indexes is to better summarize and reveal turning
point patterns in economic data. Note that a change in direction in a composite
index does not automatically indicate a cyclical turning point. The movement must
be of sufficient size, duration, and scope.4
The global perspective The most recent downturns in U.S. economic activity
occurred as other countries were experiencing the same conditions, thus, there
was a synchronized global downturn. Economies around the world are now more
integrated due to increased trade and capital flows among countries. However, the
most important reason for synchronized recessions among many countries is a com-
mon shock that is felt around the world. For example, in the 1970s, there was an
oil price shock, and it affected numerous countries. The collapse of the technol-
ogy sector, and with it the technology stocks, was the common shock that occurred
in several countries in 2000–2001. In 2008, the subprime mortgage fiasco and the
related liquidity problems with financial institutions constituted a common shock
to a number of countries.
Composite Economic
Indexes Leading, coinci-
dent, and lagging indica-
tors of economic activity
In March 2001, following the stock market plunge and
weakening of the economy, it was reported that the index
of leading economic indicators declined in February for the fourth time in
five months. In November 2001, the NBER declared that a recession began
in March 2001. In 2007, there was widespread weakness among the leading
indicators. The NBER declared that the 2008–2009 recession officially started
in December 2007.
EXAMPLE 13.1
Some Practical Advice
In the last half of 2011, many people worried
that the United States would suffer another
recession—a double dip. However, the leading
economic indicator index was at a high level
and had been rising for five months. The United
States has not suffered a recession under
these conditions. While this is no guarantee, it
is about as good an assurance as we can get
about the economy from any single piece of
information.
3 The Conference Board, a business membership and research network founded in 1916, assumed the
responsibility for computing the composite indexes from the Department of Commerce.
4 This information is available at the Conference Board website, http://www.conference-board.org/
data/bciarchive.cfm?cid51.
352 Chapter 13 Economy/Market Analysis
Keep in mind the potential importance of foreign trade to GDP. While the
growth rate of real GDP may be positive, the growth rate of gross domestic spend-
ing (which excludes net foreign trade) can be negative. In the same manner, an
increase in overseas corporate profits for U.S. companies can offset (partially or
totally) a decrease in domestic corporate profits.
Has the business cycle been tamed? From the end of WWII through the end
of the 20th century, there were nine recessions. A record-long expansion began
in 1991 and peaked in March 2001. This extended period of prosperity prompted
some observers to ask whether the business cycle was dead. As one CEO noted, “We
are in a global economy . . .” which “has changed the paradigm. . . . We don’t see the
cyclical events that characterized the past.”5 As it turns out, this was an unfortunate
observation, given the two subsequent periods of economic crisis and the accompa-
nying recessions of 2001 and 2008–2009.
The other side of the coin is that as expansions continue, people tend to forget
the lessons learned from prior recessions. As one researcher noted, “Who can elimi-
nate herding?”—referring to the tendency of people to get collectively carried away.
Expansions typically end for one of the following reasons: an overheating economy
with rising inflation, forcing the Federal Reserve (Fed) to raise interest rates; an
external shock, such as a sharp rise in oil prices; or a financial crash following a
break in a speculative bubble. For example, the Japanese economic expansion of
the 1980s was a speculative bubble that drove stock prices and land values to record
levels, and the bubble burst at the end of the 1980s—the Japanese economy and
market have yet to fully recover.
One can argue that a bubble occurred in the U.S. stock market in the late 1990s,
peaking in March 2000.6 Regardless of whether a “true” bubble occurred or not and
whether such a bubble caused a recession, the recession was short-lived as it began
in March 2001 and ended in November 2001, only eight months after it started.
While business cycles may be different than they were historically, they will con-
tinue to exist. This was made clear by the start of the 11th recession since WWII in
December 2007. This recession brought new shocks to the U.S. economy not seen
since the Great Depression. Unprecedented events happened in the form of gov-
ernment bailouts, government involvement in banks and other companies, severe
changes on Wall Street, and turbulence in the stock market that truly frightened
many people. Anyone who previously believed that the business cycle had been
tamed was surely cured of that belief in 2008 as unemployment reached levels not
seen in 30 years, numerous financial institutions failed, and at least two automakers
were on the brink of bankruptcy.
Forecasts of the Economy
Good economic forecasts are of significant value to investors, but how good are
the available forecasts? Some research suggests that forecasts made by prominent
forecasters are very similar and that differences in accuracy are very small, sug-
gesting that investors can use any of a number of such forecasts. Obviously, not all
Assessing the Economy 353
forecasters are equally accurate, and all forecasters make errors. The good news is
that forecast accuracy apparently has increased over time.
Investors can find forecasts of the economy from various sources. Some of these
are what are referred to as “consensus” forecasts. For example, Blue Chip Economic
Indicators is a publication that compiles consensus forecasts from well-known eco-
nomic forecasters of important economic variables such as real GDP, consumer
prices, and interest rates. Thus, investors can find reputable, consistently done (but
not necessarily accurate) forecasts of the economy for at least the year ahead.
The impact of the Fed Many investors closely monitor the actions of the Fed
because of its role in monetary policy and its impact on interest rates. When Fed
officials testify before Congress or otherwise make public statements, the financial
markets scrutinize every word for clues as to the future of the economy and finan-
cial markets. During normal economic times, the Fed carries out monetary policy
through what is known as its “dual mandate.”
In 1977, Congress gave formal recognition of the monetary objectives of the Fed
by identifying the Fed’s dual mandate. According to the dual mandate, the Fed is to
apply its policies to promote the goals of maximum employment and stable prices
(essentially, low inflation). The power of the Fed is derived primarily due to its
authority over these two prominent aspects of the economy.
Not surprisingly, relationships between macro variables are imprecise and con-
troversies exist about the impact of changes in policy variables on the economy.
Most economists agree that monetary policy tightening can slow an overheating
economy, whereas monetary expansion can stimulate a weak economy. There is,
however, considerable disagreement regarding the effectiveness of Fed policy and
the timing of policy changes and their subsequent economic impact.
How does the Fed change the money supply? Essentially all changes in the money
supply are initiated via the Fed’s most powerful monetary policy tool—its open mar-
ket operations. The Fed executes its open market operations through the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC). If the Fed believes that the economy would ben-
efit from monetary stimulus—that is, an expansion of the money supply—the Fed
directs the FOMC to purchase bonds. The bond purchase replaces bond holdings
of financial institutions (banks) with cash, which the banks then lend to custom-
ers who put the funds to productive use expanding business operations. Thus, the
FOMC’s purchase of bonds results in more money circulating through the econ-
omy, which represents an increase in the money supply. As a response to the 2008
financial crisis, the Fed initiated a program referenced as Quantitative Easing (QE)
to shore up the financial markets. QE is essentially nothing new but rather the Fed’s
open market bond purchase program on steroids.
If the Fed believes that inflation is an overriding concern, its policy will reflect
monetary tightening. To execute this policy, the Fed will direct the FOMC to sell
bonds, thus replacing bank cash holdings with bonds. An increase in banks’ bond
holdings diminishes the money available to create bank loans, which puts the brakes
on the economy. Thus, the ultimate result of FOMC bond sales is a reduction in
money circulating through the economy.7
Insights from the yield curve The yield curve depicts the relationship between
bond yields and time to maturity. The curve shows how the yield on short-term,
7 For a more complete discussion of the relation between Fed policy and markets, see Robert Johnson,
Gerald Jensen, and Luis Garcia-Feijoo, Invest with the Fed: Maximizing Portfolio Performance by Following Fed-
eral Reserve Policy (McGraw Hill Inc., 2015).
354 Chapter 13 Economy/Market Analysis
intermediate-term, and long-term bonds relate to one another. It contains valuable
information because it reflects bond traders’ views about the direction of future
interest rates and the economy in general. For example, an upward-sloping yield
curve indicates that bond traders believe that interest rates will increase in the
future. Several studies suggest that the yield curve is very useful in making economic
forecasts.
Many investors believe that the shape of the yield curve is related to the stage of
the business cycle. In the early stages of an expansion, yield curves tend to be low
and upward-sloping, and as the peak of the cycle approaches, yield curves tend to
be high and downward-sloping. More specifically:
• A steepening yield curve suggests that the economy is accelerating in terms of
activity.
• When the yield curve becomes more flat, it suggests that economic activity is
slowing.
• For many, an inverted yield curve carries an ominous message—the expec-
tation of an economic slowdown (every recession since WWII has been pre-
ceded by a downward-sloping yield curve).
The typical yield curve pattern is depicted by Figure 13.2, which shows a series
of Treasury yield curves around the most recent recession of 2008. During a strong
growth period, the yield curve was upward sloping as illustrated by the January 2005
curve. By January 2006, the curve had become basically flat. By early 2007, the yield
curve had a slight downward slope, and by December 2007, the economy was in
recession.
A prominent model for forecasting recessions relies on the spread between long-
term and short-term bonds, that is, the shape of the yield curve. According to the
model’s creators, it was quite successful in predicting recessions four quarters in
advance of their start.8
2
3
4
5
6
Percent
Years to maturity
Treasury Yield Curves
2005 2006 2007
1 year 5 year 10 year 20 year
FIGURE 13.2 Treasury yield curves
Source: Data was obtained from the Federal Reserve website, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/.
Checking Your Understanding
1. Assume you observe a downward-sloping yield curve. As an investor, what sig-
nificance would this have to you? How much confidence would you have in
the conclusions you draw from this?
The Stock Market and the Economy
The stock market is a significant and vital part of the overall economy. If the econ-
omy is weak, most companies perform poorly, as does the stock market. Conversely,
if the economy is prospering, most companies do well, and the stock market reflects
this economic strength. The relationship between the economy and the stock mar-
ket, however, is not coincident as stock prices generally lead the economy. Histori-
cally, the stock market is the most sensitive indicator of the business cycle (it is one
of the leading indicators).
• The market and the economy are closely related, but stock prices typically
turn before the economy.
How reliable is this relationship between the stock market and the business cycle?
While it is generally considered reliable, it is widely known that the market has given
false signals about future economic activity, particularly with regard to recessions.
The old joke goes something like this—“The market has predicted nine out of the
last five recessions.”
Recognizing that the market does not always lead the economy in the predicted
manner, consider what an examination of the historical record shows:
• Stock prices often peak roughly one year before the start of a recession.
• The typical contraction in stock prices is 25 percent from the peak, but has
been more than 40 percent. For example, in 2000–2002, the S&P 500 declined
45 percent from its peak.
• The ability of the market to predict recoveries has been remarkably good.
• Stock prices almost always turn up three to five months before a recovery, with
four months being very typical.
Investments Intuition
Why is the stock market a leading indicator of
the economy? Basically, investors discount the
future because stocks are worth the discounted
value of all future cash flows. Current stock prices
reflect investor expectations of the future. Stock
prices adjust quickly if investor expectations of
corporate profits change. Of course, the market
can misjudge corporate profits, resulting in a false
signal about future movements in the economy.
An alternative explanation for stock prices
leading the economy involves changes in
investor confidence. A change in investor
confidence changes the required return in the
opposite direction. For example, an increase in
investor confidence reduces required returns,
which increases stock prices.
356 Chapter 13 Economy/Market Analysis
In summary, although the leading relationship between the stock market and the
economy is far from perfect, investors must take it into account.
• Typically, by the time investors clearly recognize what the economy is doing,
such as going into recession or coming out of recession, the stock market has
already anticipated the event and reacted.
The Economy and Stock Market Booms
In a complex economy such as the U.S. economy, exact relationships cannot be
specified. Nevertheless, based on an analysis of the past, some clear guidelines have
emerged. Stock market booms (bull markets) have generally occurred during peri-
ods of relatively rapid economic growth. Productivity growth is also associated with
market booms; however, there is little evidence linking stock market performance
with unusual growth in the money supply or aggregate credit. Bull markets have
occurred during periods of deflation, price stability, and inflation.
Economic Slowdowns and Bear Markets
What happens to the stock market when economic activity slows, for example in
a recession? Common sense suggests a negative impact on the market, and that is
what has happened historically. By mid-July 2008, the major market indexes had
all declined at least 20 percent from their prior peaks, the classic definition of a
bear market. The economy was in great turmoil from the subprime debacle, record
oil prices, bank failures, and so forth.
According to National Bureau of Economic Research, since 1957, there have
been nine recessions in the United States. The average length of these reces-
sions was about 12 months, with the shortest lasting 6 months and the longest
lasting 18 months. The average stock return during these nine recessions was
−1.5 percent.
A reasonable hypothesis to explain the stock market’s decline when the econ-
omy slows is that investors become more risk averse and demand a higher return
for holding stocks. Campbell and Cochrane formalized this idea in a model. 9
With an economy going into, or in, a recession, investors are less willing to
bear financial risk. To induce investors to hold stocks rather than Treasury
securities, the equity risk premium must increase, which results in stock cash
flows being discounted at a higher discount rate. Thus, stock prices fall during
recessions.
Bull Markets A relatively
strong upward trend in
the stock market
Bear Market A downward
trend in the stock market
The business cycle–stock price relationship is illustrated
by what happened in 2000–2001. Following a strong
run-up in the late 1990s, the U.S. stock market peaked in March 2000. After
reaching this market peak, the impressive 10-year economic expansion of the
1990s ended one year later in March 2001. A recession then ensued from
March 2001 through November 2001.
EXAMPLE 13.2
9 John Y. Campbell and John H. Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107 (1999): 205–251
Understanding the Stock Market 357
History shows, however, that stock returns tend to recover fairly quickly after a
recession ends. For example, the market was up an average of 15.3 percent in the
year following the nine recessions that have occurred post-1957. Furthermore, in
only one case—the 2001 recession—was the return negative in the ensuing year.10
Checking Your Understanding
2. Assume you determine this month that the economy has reached a peak and
is headed downward. What conclusions would you draw about stock prices?
Understanding the Stock Market
A Model of Aggregate Stock Prices
In Chapter 10, we considered a model to estimate the intrinsic value of stocks, which
relied on a firm’s forecasted earnings and an estimated appropriate P/E for the
stock. The same model can be applied to the aggregate stock market as represented
by a market index such as the S&P 500.
To value the stock market using the multiplier approach, you must estimate
index earnings and the earnings multiplier as shown in Equation 13-1. This model
uses an appropriate P/E ratio, which we call P E0 1/ A . We use the S&P 500 for our
example:
P P
E E0
0
1
1
A
(13-1)
where
E
P
E
1
0
1
expected earnings on the
the appro
S&P 500
A
ppriate price-earnings ratio or multiplier
We consider each of these variables in turn.
The earnings stream Estimating earnings for purposes of valuing the market
is not easy. Corporate profits are derived from corporate sales, which in turn are
related to GDP. A detailed, top-down fundamental analysis of the economy/market
involves estimating GDP, then corporate sales, working down to corporate earnings
before taxes, and finally to corporate earnings after taxes. Each of these steps can
be time-consuming and tedious. However, evidence supports the value of the pro-
cess as real (inflation-adjusted) earnings growth has correlated well with real GDP
growth over the long run.
• When estimating real earnings growth for the future, the best guide may be
expected real GDP growth.
10 A discussion of the relation between recessions and stock returns can be retrieved from, Carlson, Ben
(2015, March 15). Stock Performance Before, During & After Recessions. https://awealthofcommonsense
.com/2015/03/stock-performance-before-during-after-recessions/.
The volatility in the market P/E indicates that investors cannot simply extrapolate
P/E ratios into the future. While average P/E ratios over long periods are reason-
ably steady, the variation over shorter periods is large. For the S&P 500, the average
P/E for the last 100 years is about 16.0. However, individual years can be very differ-
ent. The P/E ratio was at its lowest point in the last 30 years at 11.9 in 1989. It vacil-
lated dramatically over the next 20 years but kept advancing until reaching a peak
of 70.9 in 2009. The extreme value in 2009 can be attributed to the stock market’s
post-crisis recovery being quicker than the rebound in corporate earnings. The P/E
ratio fell substantially over the next few years before rebounding and climbing again
to 25 in 2018.
P/E ratios are generally depressed when economic growth is weak and interest
rates are high, such as the 1989–1991 period when real corporate earnings growth
was negative. P/E ratios tend to be high when economic growth is relatively strong
and inflation and interest rates are low, such as the period following President
Trump’s election in 2016. When earnings are growing fairly rapidly, investor confi-
dence is high, and the prospects for continued growth is strong, investors are willing
to pay more for earnings.
• P/E ratios can be calculated based on historical earnings or estimated future
earnings.
The earnings multiplier (P/E ratio) can be derived using several alternative
earnings measures including most recent year-end, trailing 12 months (TTM),
next year’s estimated year-end earnings, or earnings estimated over the next 12
months. If historical earnings are used, the P/E is sometimes referenced as a trail-
ing P/E; this is the standard P/E. When estimated earnings are used in deriving
the P/E, the ratio is commonly referenced as the forward or leading P/E. Obvi-
ously, a significant difference can exist between P/E ratios calculated using these
different definitions.
Putting the two together Valuing the aggregate market is not easy because
the market is always looking ahead. No one knows for sure how far the market is
looking ahead, and no one knows for sure what the market will be willing to pay
for a dollar of earnings. Furthermore, industry analysts are notoriously optimistic
when forecasting market earnings more than one quarter out, such as earnings
for next year.
Regardless of the difficulties, the bottom line is this—to derive an estimate of
the market value, an investor must analyze both factors that determine stock prices:
corporate earnings and the multiplier.
For the period from 2012 through 2017, the S&P 500
turned in an impressive 16 percent average annual
return; however, real earnings grew by a meager 2.5 percent per year. What
explains this discrepancy? Stock prices are a function of both earnings and
the P/E ratio. During this period, stock returns were aided by a significant
advance in the P/E ratio; from 15 at the beginning of 2012 to 25 at the
beginning of 2018.
EXAMPLE 13.3
360 Chapter 13 Economy/Market Analysis
Checking Your Understanding
3. Assume you are convinced that you accurately know what corporate earnings
will be for next year. Can you then reliably predict the direction of the market?
Making Market Forecasts
• Accurate forecasts of the stock market, particularly short-term forecasts, are
impossible for anyone to make on a consistent basis.
As discussed in Chapter 12, there is strong evidence that the market is generally effi-
cient, which implies that investors cannot easily predict market changes. Another
implication is that even professional money managers cannot consistently forecast
the market using available information, and the available evidence on the perfor-
mance success of professional investors supports this proposition.
Nevertheless, many investors seek to estimate changes in the stock market. They
want to understand what the market is doing currently and why, and they also want
some reasonable estimates of the future. Part of this process involves analyzing the
health of the overall economy. Ultimately, to estimate market value and market
returns, investors need estimates for several variables including corporate earnings
(EPS), firm payout and financing activities, inflation and interest rates, and the P/E
ratio. As we have seen, however, accurate estimates are difficult to obtain. What,
then, can investors do to assess future movements in the market?
Forecasting Stock Market Returns
The Grinold Kroner model combines the three major components that impact equi-
ties to arrive at an estimated stock market return (Rs).11 The model appears as follows:
RS Income return Earnings growth Repricing
Concepts in Action
How Analysts Go About Valuing the Market
With the subprime crisis, record oil prices, and the
mass failure of financial institutions, 2008 was a
year of great turmoil. In mid-June 2008, analysts
were trying to predict where the S&P 500, then at
1,360, would go. As a Wall Street Journal article
noted, “Where the market ends up depends on
how much companies earn during the rest of
the year and what price, or multiple, investors put
on those earnings.” This illustrates the discussion
above—two variables determine stock prices,
earnings and multiples.
Many analysts were doubting the 8 percent
earnings forecast for the year and were particu-
larly dubious about forecasts of strong earnings
growth for 2009. As for the P/E ratio, which was
slightly less than 17, there were fears that higher
inflation would lead to lower multiples. Holding
earnings constant, this would lead to a lower
value for the S&P 500.
Quote from Tom Lauricella, “Skeptics See
Stocks Mired in the Muck,” The Wall Street Journal,
June 16, 2008, p. C1.
Making Market Forecasts 361
or
R D
P S i g P ES /
Income return is the component of market return distributed to shareholders as
cash. The biggest portion of this component is the dividend yield D
P , but increas-
ingly share repurchases ∆( )S have become an important part of this term. Share
repurchases are measured as the percentage change in shares outstanding. The
share repurchase term adds to the return estimate when repurchases exceed equity
issues but reduces the estimate when equity issues are larger.
The earnings growth and repricing components represent the capital gains
portion of equity returns. Earnings growth is comprised of two terms, inflation (i)
and real earnings growth (g). Real earnings growth is measured as the percentage
change in real EPS. Since both EPS and share repurchases reflect shares outstand-
ing, the change in number of shares outstanding should only be considered in one
of the two terms, not both. The final term in the equation is the repricing compo-
nent, which represents the expected percentage change in the P/E ratio.
Over the past 90 years, the average annual stock return for the United States has
been approximately 10 percent. The return can be decomposed as follows. The
income return component contributed about 4 percent, with virtually all of that
coming from dividends earlier in the period and a more even split between divi-
dends and repurchases in the latter time frame. The earnings growth component
has contributed close to 5 percent, and repricing has contributed the remainder,
approximately 1 percent.
One of the most attractive features of the Grinold Kroner framework is that it
forces analysts to consider the components explaining future market returns. For
example, if analysts forecast much higher or lower returns going forward, the ques-
tion is “what component will shift to justify the projected change in return?”
Focus on the Important Variables
It has long been known that stock prices are closely related to corporate earnings
and that interest rates play a major role in affecting both bond and stock prices.
Consider an interview with Warren Buffett. 12 Buffett was asked to comment on the
likely scenario for the market. Buffett argued that long-term movements in stock
prices are caused by significant changes in “two critical economic variables”:
1. Interest rates
2. Expected corporate profits
If investors wish to understand the stock market and make reasonable judgments
about future movements in stock prices, they must carefully analyze interest rates
and expected corporate profits.
Corporate earnings, interest rates, and stock prices The graphs in Figure 13.4
illustrate the relation between corporate earnings, stock returns, interest rates, and
P/E ratios. The first graph in the figure shows the close relation that exists between
earnings and stock returns. Returns to the S&P 500 come very close to mirroring
movements in S&P 500 EPS values (change in profits) during most of the period.
12 See “Warren Buffett on the Stock Market,” Fortune, December 10, 2001, p. 82.
362 Chapter 13 Economy/Market Analysis
It is logical to expect a close relationship between corporate profits and stock
prices. Higher corporate earnings should correspond with increasing stock returns,
whereas lower corporate earnings should align with decreasing stock returns. Cor-
porate earnings growth is the basis for share price growth. In fact, holding the P/E
ratio constant, growth in price should match growth in earnings.
From the graph, the close relation between earnings growth and stock returns is
especially obvious in the period starting around the financial crisis of 2008, when
earnings and stock returns both dropped sharply. In the following years, both meas-
ures rebounded substantially and tracked each other quite closely.
Interest rates are a basic component of the discount rate, and the discount rate is
generally inversely related to the P/E ratio. Therefore, P/E ratios tend to be higher
when interest rates are low and declining, whereas they are generally lower during
rising rate environments. However, the relation between P/E ratios and interest rates
is not nearly as close as the relation between stock returns and corporate profits.
Checking Your Understanding 363
The second graph in Figure 13.4 depicts the S&P 500 P/E ratio relative to the
5-year T-bond rate. As shown, interest rates gradually declined from 1990 to the
early 2000s as the P/E ratio rose. In contrast, as rates rose from 2003 through 2006,
the P/E ratio fell. The extreme P/E ratio in 2009 occurred because stock prices
rebounded much more quickly than earnings after the financial crisis. Following
the financial crisis, interest rates have been extremely low, which has allowed the
P/E ratio to remain elevated.
If the level of interest rates increases, the risk-free rate (RF), increases. Therefore,
other things being equal, the required return (discount rate) increases because RF
is one of its two components; the other being the risk premium. Investors pay close
attention to the release of information that could influence interest rates such as
material announcements by the Fed.
Like most market relationships, the relationship between interest rates and stock
prices is not perfect. Nor do interest rates have a linear effect on stock prices. The
analysts’ purpose is to obtain general clues regarding the direction of the economy
and the market. For example, to say that we are confident the DJIA will fall to 15,000
or rise to 35,000 one year from now is foolish. Similarly, a firm prediction that cor-
porate earnings will rise next year by 10 percent, or that interest rates are sure to rise
(or fall) 2 percent, is a virtually certain prescription for embarrassment.
• In truth, most individual investors—indeed, most professional investors—can-
not time the market consistently.
What, then, should investors do? The best approach is to recognize the futility of
attempting to accurately forecast the market and to recognize that periodically situ-
ations will develop that suggest strong action. An example is 2008 when the stock
market had fallen by more than 36 percent, corporate earnings were down, and
interest rates had also fallen dramatically. Either the U.S. financial system was going
to collapse or things would normalize going forward. The financial markets did not
collapse and 2009 saw a stock market return of nearly 26 percent.
Investors may simply choose to hold their positions when the market appears
ready to decline. Why? According to available evidence, investors lose more by miss-
ing a bull market than by dodging a bear market. This is consistent with the evi-
dence showing that investors who miss a relatively few days in the market may lose
much of the gains over the long-run period.
Checking Your Understanding
4. Given that earnings and the P/E ratio determine stock prices, what is the
logic for arguing that interest rates are one of the two critical variables in
forecasting the direction of the market?
As support for the importance of interest rates, consider
the following financial media headlines:
“Markets Fall on Absence of Rate Cut”
“Recent Rise in Long-Term Interest Rates May Mean Trouble for the Stock
Market”
“As Interest Rates Rise, Will Stocks Fall?”
“How Rising Interest Rates Could Affect Your Portfolio”
EXAMPLE 13.4
364 Chapter 13 Economy/Market Analysis
Using the Business Cycle to Make Market Forecasts
Earlier we established that certain composite indexes can be helpful in forecasting
or ascertaining the position of the business cycle. However, stock prices are one of
the leading indicators, tending to lead the economy’s turning points, both peaks
and troughs. This leading relationship between stock prices and the economy must
be taken into account in forecasting changes in stock prices.
Stock prices generally decline in recessions, and the more severe the recession,
the steeper the decline. However, investors need to forecast the business cycle’s
turning points months before they occur for their forecasts to be useful in predict-
ing stock returns. If an economic downturn appears likely in the future, the market
is also likely to contract some months ahead of the downturn.
We can be somewhat more precise about the leading role of stock prices. Stock
prices have almost always risen as the business cycle is approaching a trough. These
increases have been large, so that investors do well during these periods. Further-
more, stock prices often remain steady or even decline suddenly as the business
cycle enters into the initial phase of recovery.
The above analysis suggests:
1. If an investor can recognize an approaching trough in the economy, a market
rise can be predicted before the bottom is hit.
2. The market’s average gain over the 12 months following its bottom point is
about 36 percent.
3. As the economy recovers, stock prices may level off or even decline. There-
fore, a second significant movement in the market may be predictable.
4. The market P/E usually rises just before the end of an economic slump. It
then remains roughly unchanged over the next year.
The E/P Ratio and the Treasury Bond Yield
Practitioners on Wall Street sometimes use a valuation model that compares the
earnings yield with the nominal yield on a long-term Treasury bond. This model,
often referred to as the “Fed model,” is based on the simple premise that investors
switch between stocks and bonds, based on the asset offering the higher yield. For
example, when bond yields are relatively low, investors switch out of bonds and into
stocks driving stock prices up and bond prices down.13
Some Practical Advice
Forecasting market movements is a humbling
experience and will cause the forecaster to look
foolish sooner or later—in all likelihood, sooner.
The points mentioned above are based on past
experience, but the past does not always repeat
itself. At the end of 2017, many market observers
felt that 2018 would be a strong year for the stock
market. The Trump administration had ushered
in a more favorable regulatory environment, cor-
porate tax rates had been reduced, interest rates
were low, and corporate profits were growing.
Most economic variables pointed to strong stock
performance. However, 2018 turned out to be a
poor year for the stock market
Questions 367
as Six of the 10 biggest down days since 1926 have occurred in October. As Mark
Twain said, “October is one of the peculiarly dangerous months to speculate in
stocks.” However, the rest of his quote goes as follows: “The others are: July, January,
September, April, November, May, March, June, December, August, and February.”
Summary
• The recurring pattern of expansion and contraction in the economy is
referred to as the business cycle. Stock prices are related to the phases of the
business cycle.
• Leading, lagging, and coincident indicators are used to monitor the economy
in terms of business cycle turning dates.
• Stock prices are a well-known leading indicator for the economy. Therefore,
although the market and the economy are related, stock prices usually turn
before the economy.
• Macroeconomic forecasts have become more accurate, but there is much
room for improvement.
• Although aggregate measures of money and credit are not very effective in fore-
casting the market, investors should monitor the actions of the Federal Reserve.
• The “market” is the aggregate of all security prices and is conveniently meas-
ured by an index of stock prices.
• To understand what determines stock prices, it is desirable to think in terms of
a valuation model such as the P/E model or the discounted cash flow model.
• To value the market, investors can think in terms of expected corporate earn-
ings and the P/E ratio.
• Corporate earnings are related to the growth rate of the economy as measured
by GDP.
• Forecasting market changes is difficult. Precise forecasts are generally out of
the question. Instead, we are seeking the direction of stock prices and the
duration of any trend that may be occurring.
• Some intelligent estimates of possible changes in the market can be made by
considering what is likely to happen to corporate profits and P/E ratios (or
interest rates) over some future period, such as a year.
• The E/P model (often called the Fed model) compares bond yields to earn-
ings yields to forecast market returns.
• Other approaches to assessing the market’s likely direction include assessing
the market’s current P/E ratio relative to its historical average, an analysis
of interest rate spreads, the status of monetary policy, the impact of volatility
using the VIX index, and using January as an indicator.
Questions
13.1 Why is market analysis so important?
13.2 How did the performance of the euro during 2017–
2018 affect U.S. investors in foreign securities?
13.3 Why should investors be concerned with GDP
growth?
13.4 On average, how long are business cycle expansions
and contractions since WWII?
13.5 What is the historical relationship between stock
prices, corporate profits, and interest rates?
13.6 How can investors go about valuing the market?
13.7 What was the primary cause of the rise in stock
prices starting in 2017?
13.8 What is the “typical” business cycle–stock-price rela-
tionship?
