1 The Investment Environment

MyLab Finance Chapter Introduction Video
Learning Goals
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

LG1 Understand the meaning of the term investment and list the attributes that distinguish one investment from another.
LG2 Describe the investment process and types of investors.
LG3 Discuss the principal types of investments.
LG4 Describe the purpose and content of an investment policy statement, review fundamental tax considerations, and discuss investing over the life cycle.
LG5 Describe the most common types of short-term investments.
LG6 Describe some of the main careers available to people with financial expertise and the role that investments play in each.
You have worked hard for your money. Now it is time to make your money work for you. Welcome to the world of investments. There are literally thousands of investments, from all around the world, from which to choose. How much should you invest, when should you invest, and which investments are right for you? The answers depend upon the knowledge and financial circumstances of each investor.

Financial news is plentiful, and finding financial information has become easier than ever. Traditional media outlets, including TV networks such as CNBC, Bloomberg Television, and Fox Business Network and print-based powerhouses such as The Wall Street Journal and The Financial Times, provide financial advice for individual investors. However, more people obtain investment information from the Internet than from all other sources combined. The Internet makes enormous amounts of information readily available, enables investors to trade securities with the click of a mouse, and provides free and low-cost access to tools that were once restricted to professional investors. All of this helps create a more level playing field—yet at the same time, such easy access can increase the risks for inexperienced investors.

Whether you are an experienced investor or a novice, the same investment fundamentals apply. Perhaps the most fundamental principle in investing, and one that you would be wise to keep in mind whenever you invest, is this—there is a tradeoff between an investment’s risk and its return. Most people would like their investments to be as profitable as possible, but there is an almost unavoidable tendency for investments with the greatest profit potential to be associated with the highest risk. You will see examples of the link between risk and return throughout this text. First, we address the question, “What is an investment?”

Investments and the Investment Process
LG 1
LG 2
NOTE The Learning Goals shown at the beginning of the chapter are keyed to text discussions using these icons.
You are probably already an investor. If you have money in a savings account, you have at least one investment to your name. An investment is any asset into which you place funds with the expectation that it will generate positive income and/or increase its value. A collection of different investments is called a portfolio.

The rewards, or returns, from investing come in two basic forms: income and increased value. Money invested in a savings account provides income in the form of periodic interest payments. A share of common stock may also provide income (in the form of dividends), but investors often buy stock because they expect its price to rise. That is, common stock offers both income and the chance of an increased value. In the United States since 1900, the average annual return on a savings account has been a little more than 4%. The average annual return on common stock has been about 11.5%. Of course, during major market downturns (such as the one that occurred in 2008), the returns on nearly all investments fall well below these long-term historical averages.

Is cash placed in a non-interest-bearing checking account an investment? No, because it fails both tests of the definition: It does not provide added income, and its value does not increase. In fact, over time inflation erodes the purchasing power of money left in a non-interest-bearing checking account.

Attributes of Investments

When you invest, the organization in which you invest—whether it is a company or a government entity—offers you the prospect of a future benefit in exchange for the use of your funds. You are giving up the use of your money, or the opportunity to use that money to consume goods and services today, in exchange for the prospect of having more money, and thus the ability to consume goods and services, in the future. Organizations compete for the use of your funds, and just as retailers compete for customers’ dollars by offering a wide variety of products with different characteristics, organizations attempting to raise funds from investors offer a wide variety of investments with different attributes. As a result, investments of every type are available, from virtually zero-risk savings accounts at banks, which in recent years offered returns hovering barely above 0%, to shares of common stock in high-risk companies that might skyrocket or plummet in a short time. The investments you choose will depend on your resources, your goals, and your willingness to take risk. We can describe a number of attributes that distinguish one type of investment from another.

NOTE Investor Facts offer interesting or entertaining tidbits of information.
Investor Facts

Art as an Asset
Is art a good investment? Paintings and other artworks trade infrequently (i.e., they are illiquid), so measuring the investment performance of art is difficult. Using sophisticated statistical methods, one study pegged the average annual return on art (from 1961 to 2013) at just over 6%. That figure is higher than the returns earned on investments in real estate and U.S. government securities but below returns delivered by commodities, corporate bonds, and common stocks.

(Source: Based on “Does It Pay to Invest In Art? A Selection-Corrected Returns Perspective,” Review of Financial Studies, 2016.)
Securities or Property
Securities are investments issued by firms, governments, or other organizations that represent a financial claim on the issuer’s resources. The most common securities are stocks and bonds, but more exotic types such as stock options are available as well. One benefit of investing in securities is that they often have a high degree of liquidity, meaning that you can sell securities and convert them into cash quickly without incurring substantial transaction costs and without having an adverse impact on the security’s price. Stocks issued by large companies, for example, tend to be highly liquid, and investors trade billions of shares of stock each day in the markets all over the world. The focus of this text is primarily on the most basic types of securities.

Property, on the other hand, consists of investments in real property or tangible personal property. Real property refers to land, buildings, and things permanently affixed to the land. Tangible personal property includes items such as gold, artwork, antiques, and other collectibles. In most cases, property is not as easy to buy or sell as are securities, so we would say that property tends to be a relatively illiquid investment. Investors who want to sell a building or a painting may have to hire (and compensate) a real estate agent or an art dealer to locate a buyer, and it may take weeks or months to sell the property.

Investor Facts

Smart People Own Stocks
The stock market participation rate refers to the percentage of households that invest in stocks directly or indirectly. A study of investors from Sweden found that an extra year of schooling increased the stock market participation rate by two percentage points and increased the share of wealth that individuals invested in stocks by 10%. Another study looked at investors from Finland and found a remarkable connection between IQ and stock market participation—people with higher IQ scores were much more likely to invest in stocks than were people with lower IQ scores. More remarkable still, the IQ measure used in this study was the score on a test given to Finnish males when they were 19 or 20 years old as part of their induction to military service. IQ scores measured at that early age were a very strong predictor of whether these men would invest in stocks much later in life.

(Sources: Based on “Learning to Take Risks? The Effect of Education on Risk Taking in Financial Markets,” Review of Finance, 2018; “IQ and Stock Market Participation,” Journal of Finance, 2011.)
Direct or Indirect
A direct investment is one in which an investor directly acquires a claim on a security or property. If you buy shares of common stock in a company such as Apple, then you have made a direct investment, and you are a part owner of that firm. An indirect investment is an investment in a collection of securities or properties managed by a professional investor. For example, when you send your money to a mutual fund company such as Vanguard or Fidelity, you are making an indirect investment in the assets held by these mutual funds.

Direct ownership of common stock has been on the decline in the United States for many years. For example, in 1945 households owned (directly) more than 90% of the common stocks listed in the United States. Over time that percentage dropped to its current level of about 30.5% (by comparison, 64% of U.S. households own a home). The same trend has occurred in most of the world’s larger economies. In the United Kingdom, for example, households’ direct ownership of shares fell from roughly 66% to 14% in the past half century. Today, households directly hold less than one-quarter of outstanding shares in most of the world’s major stock markets, as Figure 1.1 shows.

Figure 1.1 Direct Stock Ownership by Households

The figure shows the percentage of common stocks in each country that is owned directly by households. In most countries, households own less than one-quarter of the value of listed common stocks in the country.
(Source: Data from “Government Policy and Ownership of Equity Securities,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2014, Vol. 111, Issue 1, pp. 70–85.)
Figure 1.1 Full Alternative Text
Just as direct stock ownership by households has been falling, indirect ownership has been rising. The percentage of U.S. households that owned mutual funds (one means of obtaining indirect ownership of stocks and other investments) rose from about 5% in 1980 to almost 55% in 2017. Individuals have indirect ownership in stocks through many other types of financial institutions besides mutual funds. In 1945 institutional investors such as pension funds, hedge funds, and mutual funds combined held just less than 2% of the outstanding stock in the United States, but today their direct ownership is approaching 70%.

Tax policy helps to explain the decline in direct stock ownership by individuals and the related rise in direct ownership by institutions such as mutual funds and pension funds. Starting in 1978, section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code allowed employees to avoid paying tax on earnings that they elect to receive as deferred compensation, such as in a retirement savings plan. Since then, most large companies have adopted so-called 401(k) plans, which allow employees to avoid paying current taxes on the income that they contribute to a 401(k) plan. Employees are taxed on this income when they withdraw it during their retirement years. Typically, mutual fund companies manage 401(k) plans, so stocks held in these plans represent indirect ownership for the workers and direct ownership for the mutual fund companies.

An important element of this trend is that individuals who trade stocks directly often deal with professional investors who sell the shares those individuals want to buy or buy what individuals want to sell. For instance, in 2018 Fidelity, one of the largest investment management companies in the world, had $2.5 trillion in assets in its various mutual funds, trusts, and other accounts, and the company employed approximately 40,000 people, many of whom had advanced investments training and access to a tremendous amount of information about the companies in which they invest. Given the preponderance of institutional investors in the market today, individuals are wise to consider the advantages possessed by the people with whom they are trading.

Debt, Equity, or Derivative Securities
Most investments fall into one of three broad categories—debt, equity, or derivatives. Debt is simply a loan that obligates the borrower to make periodic interest payments and to repay the full amount of the loan by some future date. When companies or governments need to borrow money, they issue securities called bonds. When you buy a bond, you lend money to the issuer. The issuer agrees to pay you interest and to repay the original loan at a specified time.

Equity represents ongoing ownership in a business or property. An equity investment may be held as a security or by title to a specific property. The most common type of equity security is common stock.

Derivative securities derive their value from an underlying security or asset. Stock options are an example. A stock option is an investment that grants the right to purchase (or sell) a share of stock at a fixed price for a limited time. The option’s value depends on the market price of the underlying stock.

Low- or High-Risk Investments
Investments also differ on the basis of risk. Risk reflects the uncertainty surrounding the return that a particular investment will generate. To oversimplify things slightly, the more uncertain the return associated with an investment, the greater its risk. One of the most important strategies that investors use to manage risk is diversification, which simply means holding different types of assets in an investment portfolio.

As you invest over your lifetime, you will be confronted with a continuum of investments that range from low risk to high risk. For example, stocks are generally considered riskier than bonds because stock returns vary over a much wider range and are harder to predict than are bond returns. However, it is not difficult to find high-risk bonds that are riskier than the stock of a financially sound firm.

In general, investors face a tradeoff between risk and return—to obtain higher returns, investors usually have to accept greater risks. Low-risk investments provide a relatively predictable, but also relatively low, return. High-risk investments provide much higher returns on average, but they also have the potential for much larger losses.

Short- or Long-Term Investments
The life of an investment may be either short or long. Short-term investments typically mature within one year. Long-term investments are those with longer maturities or, like common stock, with no maturity at all.

Domestic or Foreign
As recently as 30 years ago, U.S. citizens invested almost exclusively in purely domestic investments: the debt, equity, and derivative securities of U.S.-based companies and governments. The same could be said of investors in many other countries. In the past, most people invested the vast majority of their money in securities issued by entities located in their home countries. Today investors routinely also look for foreign investments (both direct and indirect) that might offer more attractive returns than purely domestic investments. Even when the returns offered by foreign investments are not higher than those found in domestic securities, investors may still choose to make foreign investments because they help them build more diversified portfolios, which in turn helps limit exposure to risk. Information on foreign companies is readily available, and it is relatively easy to make foreign investments.

NOTE Discussions of international investing are highlighted by this icon.
The Structure of the Investment Process

The investment process brings together suppliers who have extra funds and demanders who need funds. Households, governments, and businesses are the key participants in the investment process, and each of these participants may act as a supplier or a demander of funds at a particular time. However, there are some general tendencies. Households who spend less than their income have savings, and they want to invest those surplus funds to earn a return. Households, then, are generally net suppliers of funds. Governments, on the other hand, often spend more than their tax revenues, so they issue bonds and other debt securities to raise additional funds. Governments are typically net demanders of funds. Businesses are also net demanders of funds most of the time. They issue debt or equity securities to finance new investments and other activities.

Suppliers and demanders of funds usually come together by means of a financial institution or a financial market. Financial institutions are organizations, such as banks, mutual funds, and insurance companies, that pool the resources of households and other savers and use those funds to make loans and to invest in securities. Financial markets are markets in which suppliers and demanders of funds trade financial assets, typically with the assistance of intermediaries such as securities brokers and dealers. All types of investments, including stocks, bonds, commodities, and foreign currencies, trade in financial markets.

The dominant financial market in the United States is the securities market. It includes stock markets, bond markets, and options markets. Similar markets exist in most major economies throughout the world. The prices of securities traded in these markets are determined by the interactions of buyers and sellers, just as other prices are established in other kinds of markets. For example, if the number of Facebook shares that investors want to buy is greater than the number that investors want to sell, the price of Facebook stock will rise. As new information about the company becomes available, changes in supply (investors who want to sell) and demand (investors who want to buy) may result in a new market price. Financial markets streamline the process of bringing together buyers and sellers, so investors can transact with each other quickly and inexpensively. Financial markets provide another valuable function by establishing market prices for securities that are easy for market participants to monitor. For example, a firm that launches a new product may get an early indication of how that product will be received in the market by seeing whether investors drive the firm’s stock price up or down as they learn about the new product.

Figure 1.2 is a diagram of the investment process. Note that the suppliers of funds may transfer their resources to the demanders through financial institutions, through financial markets, or in direct transactions. As the broken lines show, financial institutions can participate in financial markets as either suppliers or demanders of funds. For the economy to grow and prosper, funds must flow to those with attractive investment opportunities. If individuals began suddenly hoarding their excess funds rather than putting them to work in financial institutions and markets, then organizations in need of funds would have difficulty obtaining them. As a result, government spending, business expansion, and consumer purchases would decline, and economic activity would slow.

Figure 1.2 The Investment Process

Financial institutions participate in the financial markets as well as transfer funds between suppliers and demanders. Although the arrows go only from suppliers to demanders, for some transactions (e.g., the sale of a bond or a college loan), the principal amount borrowed by the demander from the supplier (the lender) is eventually returned.
Figure 1.2 Full Alternative Text
When households have surplus funds to invest, they must decide whether to make the investment decisions themselves or to delegate some or all of that responsibility to professionals. This leads to an important distinction between two types of investors in the financial markets. Individual investors manage their own funds to achieve their financial goals. Individuals who lack the time or expertise to make investment decisions often employ institutional investors—investment professionals who earn their living by managing other people’s money. These professionals trade large volumes of securities for individuals, as well as for businesses and governments. Institutional investors include banks, life insurance companies, mutual funds, pension funds, and hedge funds.

Both individual and institutional investors apply similar fundamental principles when deciding how to invest money. However, institutional investors generally control larger sums of money and have more sophisticated analytical skills than do most individual investors. The information presented in this text is aimed primarily at you—the individual investor. Mastering this material represents only the first step that you need to take to develop the expertise you need if you want to become an institutional investor.

Concepts In Review

Answers available at www.pearson.com/mylab/finance

NOTE The Concepts in Review questions at the end of each text section encourage you, before you move on, to test your understanding of the material you’ve just read.
1.1 Define the term investment, and explain why individuals invest.

1.2 Differentiate among the following types of investments, and cite an example of each: (a) securities and property investments; (b) direct and indirect investments; (c) debt, equity, and derivative securities; and (d) short-term and long-term investments.

1.3 What is the relation between an investment’s risk and its return?

1.4 Define the term risk, and explain how risk is used to differentiate among investments.

1.5 What are foreign investments, and what role do they play for the individual investor?

1.6 Describe the structure of the overall investment process. Explain the role played by financial institutions and financial markets.

1.7 Classify the roles of (a) government, (b) business, and (c) individuals as net suppliers or net demanders of funds.

1.8 Differentiate between individual investors and institutional investors.

Types of Investments
LG 3
A wide variety of investments is available to individual investors. As you have seen, investments differ in terms of risk, maturity, and many other characteristics. We devote the bulk of this text to describing the characteristics of different investments and the strategies that you may use when you buy and sell these investments. Table 1.1 summarizes some basic information about the major types of investments that we will study.

Table 1.1 Major Types of Investments
Type	Description	Examples	Where Covered in This Book
Short-term investments	Savings instruments with lives of 1 year or less. Used to warehouse idle funds and to provide liquidity.	 			 
Ch. 1
Common stock	Equity investments that represent ownership in a corporation.	 	
Chs. 6–9
Fixed-income securities	Investments that make fixed cash payments at regular intervals.	
Bonds, Convertible securities

Preferred stock
Chs. 10, 11

Web Ch. 16
Mutual funds	Companies that pool money from many investors and invest funds in a diversified portfolio of securities.	Large-cap funds, Growth funds	
Ch. 12
Exchange-traded funds	Investment funds, typically index funds, that are exchange listed and, therefore, exchange traded.	Stock index funds, Bond index funds	
Ch. 12
Hedge funds	Alternative investments, usually in pools of underlying securities, available only to sophisticated investors, such as institutions and individuals with significant assets.	Long and short equities, Funds of funds	
Ch. 12
Derivative securities	Securities that are neither debt nor equity but are structured to exhibit the characteristics of the underlying assets from which they derive their value.	
Options

Futures
Ch. 14

Ch. 15
Other popular investments	Various other investments that are widely used by investors.	
Tax-advantaged investments

Real estate

Tangibles
Web Ch. 17

Web Ch. 18

Web Ch. 18
Short-Term Investments

Short-term investments have a life of one year or less and usually (but not always) carry little or no risk. People buy these investments to put idle funds to use before transferring the money into a long-term investment. Short-term investments are also appealing to conservative investors who are reluctant to put their funds in riskier, long-term assets such as stocks or bonds.

Short-term investments provide liquidity because investors can convert them into cash quickly with little or no loss in value. Liquidity is important to investors because it is impossible to know when an emergency or other unplanned event will make it necessary to obtain cash by selling an investment. At such a time, selling an investment quickly is important. Of course, an investor willing to sell at a bargain price can convert almost any asset to cash quickly, but an investment that is liquid doesn’t require such a concession. Liquid investments give investors peace of mind that they can to get their hands on cash quickly if they need it without having to sell their investments at fire-sale prices.

Common Stock

Common stock is an equity investment that represents ownership in a corporation. Each share of common stock represents a fractional ownership interest in the firm. For example, in early 2018, Amazon had just over 484 million shares of stock outstanding. If you bought 100 shares of Amazon, you would be a part owner of that company, though your ownership stake would be just 0.000021%! Owners of common stock usually have the right to vote at shareholders’ meetings, but for most individual investors, the voting rights are less important than the return they hope to earn.

The return on common stock comes from two sources: dividends and capital gains. Dividends are payments the corporation makes to its shareholders. Companies are not required to pay dividends, and most firms that are small or are growing very rapidly do not pay dividends. As firms grow and accumulate cash, they often start paying dividends, just as Hawaiian Airlines did in 2017. Companies that pay dividends usually pay them quarterly. Capital gains occur when the stock price rises above an investor’s initial purchase price. Capital gains may be realized or unrealized. If you sell a stock for more than you paid for it, you have realized a capital gain. If you continue to hold the stock rather than sell it, you have an unrealized capital gain.

Example McDonald’s Common Stock Return
MyLab Finance Solution Video
Suppose you purchased a single share of McDonald’s common stock for $119.62 on January 3, 2017, the first day that the stock market was open for trading that year. During 2017 you received $3.83 in cash dividends. At the end of the year, you sold the stock for $172.12. You earned $3.83 in dividends and you realized a $52.50 capital gain  for a total dollar return of $56.33. On a percentage basis, the return on McDonald’s shares in 2017 is calculated as  or 47.1%. If you continued to hold the stock rather than sell it, you would have earned the same return, but your capital gain would have been unrealized.

As mentioned earlier, since 1900 the average annual rate of return on common stocks has been about 11.5%, so 2017 was a good year for McDonald’s. As a fast food producer, McDonald’s stock generally performs better when the economy is growing (as it was in 2017) and consumers are more willing to pay for food at restaurants rather than eating at home.

Fixed-Income Securities

Fixed-income securities are investments that offer a periodic cash payment that may be fixed in dollar terms or may vary according to a predetermined formula (for example, the formula might dictate that cash payments rise if a general rise in market interest rates occurs). Some offer contractually guaranteed returns, meaning that the issuer of the security (i.e., the borrower) must fulfill a promise to make payments to investors or risk being sued. Other fixed-income securities come with the expectation of regular payments even if a contractual obligation is absent. Because of their relatively predictable cash payments, fixed-income securities tend to be popular during periods of economic uncertainty when investors are reluctant to invest in riskier securities such as common stocks. Fixed-income securities are also attractive during periods of high interest rates when investors seek to “lock in” high returns, especially if interest rates are above the inflation rate. The most common fixed-income securities are bonds, convertible securities, and preferred stock.

Bonds
Bonds are long-term debt instruments issued by corporations and governments. A bondholder has a contractual right to receive periodic interest payments plus return of the bond’s principal, face value, or par value (the original loan amount) at maturity.

If you purchased a bond with a $1,000 par value paying 6% interest in semiannual installments, you would receive an interest payment equal to  every six months. At maturity you would also receive the bond’s $1,000 face value. Bonds vary a great deal in terms of liquidity, so they may or may not be easy to sell prior to maturity.

Since 1900 the average annual rate of return on long-term government bonds has been about 5.3%. Corporate bonds are riskier because they are not backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government and, therefore, tend to offer slightly higher returns than government bonds provide.

Convertible Securities
A convertible security is a special type of fixed-income investment. It has a feature permitting the investor to convert it into a specified number of shares of common stock. Convertibles provide the fixed-income benefit of a bond (interest) while offering the price-appreciation (capital gain) potential of common stock.

Preferred Stock
Like common stock, preferred stock represents an ownership interest in a corporation and has no maturity date. Unlike common stock, preferred stock has a fixed dividend payment (in either dollar or percentage terms), and preferred stockholders often have no voting rights. Firms are generally required to pay dividends on preferred shares before they pay dividends on their common shares. Furthermore, if a firm is having financial difficulties and decides to stop paying preferred dividends, it may have to make up all of the dividend payments that it skipped before paying dividends on common shares. Investors typically purchase preferred stocks for the dividends they pay, but preferred shares may also provide capital gains.

Mutual Funds

A mutual fund is a portfolio of stocks, bonds, or other assets purchased with a pool of funds contributed by many different investors and managed by an investment company on behalf of its clients. In addition to mutual funds, investment companies operate similar investment vehicles such exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Investors in a mutual fund or an ETF own an interest in the fund’s collection of securities. Most individual investors who own stocks do so indirectly by purchasing mutual funds that hold stocks. When they send money to a mutual fund, investors buy shares in the fund (as opposed to shares in the companies in which the fund invests), and the price of the mutual fund’s shares reflects the value of the assets that the fund holds. Mutual funds allow investors to construct well-diversified portfolios without having to invest a large sum of money. After all, it’s cheaper to buy shares in a fund that holds 500 stocks than it is to buy shares in 500 companies on your own. In the last three decades, the mutual fund industry has experienced tremendous growth. The number of equity mutual funds (i.e., funds that invest mainly or exclusively in common stock) has more than quadrupled since 1980.

Investor Facts

The Feeling’s Mutual!
In 2017, the 16,818 funds managed by investment companies in the United States accounted for investment assets of $22 trillion. These mutual funds and ETFs held 31% of all U.S. stocks and managed 24% of all household financial assets.

(Source: 2018 Investment Company Fact Book, downloaded from http://www.icifactbook.org/, accessed May 9, 2018)
Most mutual fund managers follow one of two broad approaches when selecting specific securities for their funds. In an actively managed fund, managers try to identify and purchase securities that are undervalued and are therefore likely to perform particularly well in the future. Or managers try to identify overvalued securities that may perform poorly and avoid those investments. The goal of an actively managed fund is to earn a higher return than some sort of benchmark. For a mutual fund that invests in stocks, a common goal is to earn a return that is higher than the return on a market index like the Standard & Poor’s 500 Stock Index (S&P 500). In a passively managed fund, managers make no attempt to identify under- or overvalued securities. Instead, they buy a diversified portfolio of stocks and try to mimic or match the return on a market index. Because these funds provide returns that are close to the returns on a market index, they are called index funds. For more than a decade, index funds have been growing, meaning that they have been attracting new dollars from investors, while actively managed funds have been shrinking as investors withdraw dollars from those funds to invest in passively managed funds.

In return for the services they provide, mutual funds (or rather, the investment companies that run the mutual funds) charge investors fees, and some of those fees are rolled together in a figure known as the expense ratio. The expense ratio is a fee charged to investors based on a percentage of the assets invested in a fund. It accrues daily and represents one of the primary costs that investors pay when they purchase mutual fund shares. For example, if an individual has $10,000 invested in a mutual fund with an expense ratio of 1%, then the fund will charge $100 per year to manage the individual’s money.

Expense ratios are generally higher for funds that invest in riskier securities. For example, in 2017 the average expense ratio among mutual funds investing in stocks was 0.59%, meaning that investors would pay expenses equal to $59 per $10,000 invested. For funds that invest in bonds, the average expense ratio was 0.48%. Money market mutual funds (also called money funds) are mutual funds that invest solely in short-term investments. The average expense ratio for money market mutual funds in 2017 was just 0.25%.

Expense ratios also tend to be higher for actively managed funds. That shouldn’t be surprising because actively managed funds are more expensive to operate. In 2017, the average expense ratio for equity index funds was 0.09%, just one-ninth of the average expense ratio for actively managed equity funds (0.78%). For many years, expense ratios have been declining, a trend that is partly driven by the growing popularity of passively managed funds. The average expense ratio for equity mutual funds fell 27 basis points (or just over one quarter of one percent) in the last decade, from 0.86% in 2007 to 0.59% in 2017. Falling expense ratios is good news for mutual fund investors. Even so, there is considerable variation in expense ratios from one fund to another, so investors need to pay close attention to expenses before they choose a fund.

In addition to the expense ratio, some funds charge a fee called a load. A load may be charged up front when the investor initially buys shares in the fund, in which case it is called a sales load. Alternatively, when investors sell their shares the fund may charge a fee known as a redemption fee or back-end load. Typically, redemption fees are reduced or waived entirely if investors keep their money in the fund for a long time.

Exchange-Traded Funds

Like mutual funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs) hold portfolios of securities, and investors buy shares in the ETF. ETFs are very similar to mutual funds. They allow investors to form well-diversified portfolios with low initial investments, and the fees charged by ETFs are generally quite low. However, there are some important differences between ETFs and mutual funds. The main distinction is that ETFs trade on exchanges, so investors can buy and sell an ETF at its current market price any time during regular trading hours. Mutual fund shares are not traded on exchanges, and when an investor buys (or sells) shares in a fund from an investment company, the transaction occurs at the end of the day using the fund’s closing price, which is determined by adding up the values of the securities the fund holds at the end of the day and dividing by the number of shares in the fund. If stock prices are changing rapidly during the day, ETF investors may be able to take advantage of this by purchasing or selling their shares before prices hit their peak (or bottom). Investors in mutual funds have to wait until the day’s end to learn the price at which they can trade fund shares.

Another important difference has to do with what happens to the money when investors buy or sell shares. When investors buy shares in a mutual fund, the fund has more money than it had before, so the fund’s managers will likely use those funds to buy more securities. Similarly, if investors sell shares in the fund, the fund’s managers may have to sell securities to raise the cash needed to redeem shares. If many investors want to sell their shares simultaneously, that may trigger a fire sale—the fund manager has to accept lower prices to quickly convert the fund’s assets into cash. In contrast, ETF shares represent a fixed number of claims on a fixed portfolio. When investors buy ETF shares, they are simply acquiring them from other investors who want to sell their shares. There is no inflow or outflow of cash into the company that manages the ETF, and therefore there is no need to buy or sell additional securities in response to investors’ transactions.

Launched in 1993, the first ETF was a broad-based equity fund designed to track the Standard & Poor’s 500 Stock Index. Since then, both the number of ETFs and the amount of money invested in them has grown explosively. From 2007 to 2017, the number of ETFs grew 200%, and assets invested in those funds grew at an average rate of 19% per year. Even so, today there is about 5.5 times more money invested in mutual funds than in ETFs.

Hedge Funds

Like mutual funds, hedge funds buy securities with pooled money obtained from many different investors. Hedge funds are generally open to a narrower group of investors than are mutual funds. For example, the minimum investment required by a mutual fund might be a few hundred dollars, whereas the minimum investment required to participate in a hedge fund runs into the hundreds of thousands of dollars. Despite the high minimum investment, hedge funds have grown in importance in recent years, with assets under management of approximately $3.5 trillion in 2018.

Hedge funds generally charge much higher fees than do mutual funds. Traditionally, hedge fund fees follow the “two and twenty” rule, which means that investors pay annual fees equal to 2% of the assets invested plus 20% of any gains the fund can achieve. The first component of the fee is the management fee and is independent of the fund’s performance. The second component is the incentive fee. Investors do not pay incentive fees if a hedge fund earns a negative return in a particular year, and it is common for the incentive fee to have a “high-water mark” feature. The high-water mark specifies that the incentive fee is not payable until a hedge fund passes its previous peak value. For example, if a hedge fund loses 6% in one year and earns 10% the following year, the incentive fee will not be paid on the second year’s entire 10% return. Instead, the fee will only apply to the increase in fund value above and beyond its previous peak. The fund has to earn back the 6% that it previously lost before new incentive fees kick in.

Hedge funds are not as closely regulated as are mutual funds, and they tend to invest in riskier and less liquid securities. The very name “hedge fund” suggests that these funds try to limit or hedge the risks that they take, and some hedge funds do operate with that goal in mind. However, other funds adopt very high-risk investment strategies. Nonetheless, the hedge-fund industry has experienced dramatic growth.

Derivative Securities

As the name suggests, derivative securities derive their value from an underlying security or asset. Many derivatives are among the most risky financial assets because they are designed to magnify price changes of the underlying asset. For example, when the price of oil moves up or down by $1 per barrel, the value of an oil futures contract (an agreement between two parties to trade oil on a future date at a specified price) moves $1,000 in the same direction. Investors may buy or sell derivatives to speculate on the movements of the underlying asset, but corporations also buy and sell derivatives to hedge against some of the risks they face. For instance, a cereal company may purchase wheat futures contracts as a kind of insurance against the possibility that wheat prices will rise.

Options
Options are securities that give the investor an opportunity to buy or sell an underlying asset at a specified price for a limited time. The underlying asset is usually another security such as a share of common stock. Investors may trade stock options to speculate on a change in the price the underlying common stock. However, the buyer of a stock option is not guaranteed a return and could easily lose the entire amount invested if the underlying stock moves in the wrong direction. Two common types of options are calls and puts. Call options grant the right to buy and put options grant the right to sell an underlying asset at a fixed price.

Futures
Futures are legally binding contracts stipulating that the seller will make delivery and the buyer will take delivery of an asset at a specific date and price. The underlying asset for a futures contract may be a commodity such as soybeans, pork bellies, platinum, or oil, or the underlying asset may be a financial instrument such as a foreign currency or a Treasury bond or even a stock index. Trading in commodity and financial futures is generally a highly specialized, high-risk proposition.

Other Popular Investments

Because the U.S. federal income tax rate for an individual can be as high as 37%, many investors look for tax-advantaged investments that provide higher after-tax returns by reducing the taxes investors must pay. For instance, municipal bonds, which are issued by state and local governments, make interest payments that are not subject to federal income taxation. Because investors do not have to pay taxes on the interest they receive on municipal bonds, they will accept lower interest rates on these investments than they will on similar bonds that make taxable interest payments.

Real estate consists of assets such as residential homes, raw land, and a variety of forms of income property, including warehouses, office and apartment buildings, and condominiums. The appeal of real estate investment is the potential returns in the forms of rental income, tax write-offs, and capital gains.

Tangibles are investment assets, other than real estate, that can be seen or touched. They include gold and other precious metals, gemstones, and collectibles such as coins, stamps, artwork, and antiques. People purchase these assets as investments in anticipation of price increases.

Concepts In Review

Answers available at http://www.pearson.com/mylab/finance

1.9 What are short-term investments? How do they provide liquidity?

1.10 What is common stock, and what are its two sources of potential return?

1.11 Briefly define and differentiate among the following investments. Which offer fixed returns? Which are derivative securities? Which offer professional investment management?

Bonds
Convertible securities
Preferred stock
Mutual funds
Hedge funds
Options
Futures

Making Your Investment Plan
LG 4
Investing can be conducted on a strictly intuitive basis or on the basis of plans carefully developed to achieve specific goals. Evidence favors the planned approach. Developing a well-thought-out investment plan encourages you to follow a disciplined approach to managing money. That discipline will help you avoid many common mistakes by keeping you focused on your goals during market swings. A good investment plan is a reminder of the goals that you are trying to achieve with your money, and it provides a kind of strategic roadmap to guide investment decisions over a lifetime. We suggest that your investment plan should begin with an Investment Policy Statement.

Writing an Investment Policy Statement

Large corporations typically have an investment policy statement (IPS) that spells out how the corporation will invest funds in the company retirement plan. Financial advisors write them for their clients. Our view is that an IPS is equally important for individual investors like you. Writing such a statement forces you to think carefully about all aspects of your investment plan, a particularly useful exercise for a novice investor. If you have a spouse or partner, an IPS can help you work out (in advance) disagreements about how much money the two of you will save and how that money will be invested. In middle age, an IPS helps you assess the progress toward your long-term financial goals. Below we outline the major elements of a well-crafted IPS.

Summarize your current situation
In the opening section of the IPS, list the assets that you own. Set a target for how much money you can save and invest each month. Describe where the money that you plan to invest will come from. Given your income and your current spending habits, is it reasonable to expect that you will have surplus funds to invest? What tax rate do you face today, and how do you expect that to change in the future? Establish some broad guidelines for the initial asset allocation in your portfolio. What percentage of your funds do you want to invest in stocks, bonds, and other investments? Ask yourself how much money you think you can afford to lose, both in the short term (over a few months) and the long term (over a few years), and articulate your action plan when losses occur. Will you sell some of your investments, simply hold onto them, or continue making new investments each month according to the plan? Try to define your investment horizon. Will you need to access the funds you are investing in a year, in a decade, or at the end of your working life? If you plan to enlist the help of a professional investment advisor, describe the process that you will use to select that person. If you have already selected an advisor, list that person’s contact information in your IPS and discuss the statement with him or her, perhaps even getting his or her signature on the document.

Specify your investment goals
Once you have outlined your current situation, write out your investment goals. Investment goals are the financial objectives you wish to achieve by investing. Are you trying to reach a specific target savings goal, such as accumulating enough money to make a down payment on a house? Or do you have a goal that is further out in the future, such as saving enough money to send your children to college or to provide enough income for your own retirement? Is your investment goal to generate more cash flow in the form of interest or dividends, or are you trying to shelter income from taxation? Achieving each of these goals may call for a different strategy. For each goal that you specify, try to determine how many years you will need to save and invest to achieve that goal, and how much money you need to invest each year to reach your goal.

Articulate your investment philosophy
In this part of the IPS, you’ll want to spell out your investment philosophy, your views about the types of investments you’re willing to make, how often you are willing to adjust your portfolio through trading, and other matters that will shape your portfolio. Perhaps the most important aspect of your investment philosophy is your risk tolerance. Your investment philosophy should indicate how much volatility in the value of your portfolio that you are willing to tolerate. For example, you might say that your portfolio should be designed to minimize the chance of losing more than 20% in a year. Your policy should indicate how important diversification is to you and how many types of investments you plan to own. Your philosophy will specify the investments you are not willing to purchase. Perhaps you will choose not to invest in certain industries for ethical reasons, or you will declare that only “plain vanilla” investments like stocks and bonds should be part of your portfolio (no derivatives or exotic investments, please). If you are working with a financial advisor, you may specify how frequently you will change the portfolio by trading, or you may provide guidelines about the trading costs or (in the case of mutual funds and ETFs) the management fees you’re willing to pay. In this section of the IPS you may choose to articulate your assumptions about the returns that you expect different types of investments to earn.

Set investment selection guidelines
For each type of investment, or asset class, that you expect to hold (e.g., stocks, bonds, mutual funds), establish guidelines for how specific investments in that asset class will be selected. For example, if you plan to hold mutual funds, will you invest in actively or passively managed funds? In your selection process, how much importance will you place on a fund’s track record (i.e., its past performance or the experience and education of the fund manager) and how much on its expense ratio and other costs of investing in the fund? If you plan to invest directly in stocks, will you focus on large, well-known companies, or are you more interested in emerging high-tech companies? Does it matter to you whether the stocks you buy pay dividends? When you are deciding which bonds to purchase, will you focus more heavily on the creditworthiness of the bond issuer or on other features of the bond such as its maturity or the interest rate that it offers?

NOTE Watch Your Behavior boxes provide insights about common mistakes that investors make gleaned from research in the field of behavioral finance.
Watch Your Behavior
Watch Your Investments, But Not Too Closely
Researchers have uncovered an interesting aspect of investor behavior. Individuals who monitor their portfolios less frequently tend to invest more in risky assets. Almost by definition, risky investments will frequently experience periods of low or even negative returns, even though over long periods of time risky assets tend to earn higher returns than safe assets do. When investors check their portfolios frequently, they apparently find it uncomfortable to observe the periods when risky investments perform badly, so they simply take less risk. One study found that when a new law in Israel prevented retirement funds from displaying returns for any period shorter than 12 months, investors put more of their money in riskier assets. In the long run, taking very little risk leads to very low returns, so it is not clear that watching investments too closely is a good thing.

(Source: Based on “The Display of Information and Household Investment Behavior,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-043, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.)
Assign responsibility for selecting and monitoring investments
In this part of the IPS, you indicate whether you will make your own investment selections or enlist the help of an advisor. Likewise, you establish a plan for monitoring your investments. Do you plan to evaluate your investment performance quarterly, semiannually, or just once a year?

What criteria will you use to determine whether your investments are meeting your expectations? Any risky investment is bound to have periods when it performs poorly, so your IPS should provide some guidance about how long you are willing to tolerate subpar performance before making a change in the portfolio. Similarly, an investment that performs particularly well for a year or two will inevitably account for a rising fraction of the portfolio’s overall value. Your IPS may describe the conditions under which you might sell some of your better performing investments simply to rebalance the portfolio.

Considering Personal Taxes

Knowledge of the tax laws can help you reduce taxes and increase the after-tax dollars you have for investing. Because tax laws are complicated and subject to frequent revision, we present only the key concepts and how they apply to investment transactions.

Basic Sources of Taxation
When forming your investment plans, you should consider both federal and state and local taxes. The federal income tax is the major form of personal taxation. Since the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, federal tax rates range from 10% to 37%, although tax rates will rise again in 2026 unless Congress acts to extend those tax cuts into the future.

State and local taxes vary widely. Top earners in California face a tax rate of 13.3%, and eight other states have tax rates on high-income households that range from 8% to 9.9%. Some cities, especially large East Coast cities, also have local income taxes that typically range between 1% and 4%. In addition to income taxes, state and local governments rely heavily on sales and property taxes as a source of revenue.

Income taxes at the federal, state, and local levels have a great impact on investment returns. Property taxes can have a sizable impact on real estate and other forms of property investment.

Types of Income
The income of individuals is classified into three basic categories:

ACTIVE INCOME consists of everything from wages and salaries to bonuses, tips, and pension income. Active income is made up of income earned on the job as well as most other forms of noninvestment income.
PORTFOLIO INCOME includes earnings generated from various types of investments. This category covers most (but not all) types of investments from savings accounts, stocks, bonds, and mutual funds to options and futures. For the most part, portfolio income consists of interest, dividends, and capital gains (the profit on the sale of an investment).
PASSIVE INCOME is a special category of income composed chiefly of income derived from real estate, limited partnerships, and other forms of tax-advantaged investments.
Ordinary Income
Whether it’s classified as active, portfolio, or passive, ordinary income is taxed at the federal level at one of seven rates: 10%, 12%, 22%, 24%, 32%, 35%, or 37%. There is one tax-rate structure for taxpayers who file individual returns and another for those who file joint returns with a spouse. Table 1.2 shows the 2018 tax rates and income brackets for these two categories. Note that the rates are progressive; that is, income is taxed in a tiered progression—the first portion of a taxpayer’s income is taxed at one rate, the next portion at a higher rate, and so on. Under a progressive tax structure, an investor’s marginal tax rate, the tax rate paid on the last dollar of income, may be different than the average tax rate, the ratio of total taxes due to total taxable income. An example demonstrates ordinary income taxation.

Table 1.2 Federal Income Tax Rates and Brackets for Individual and Joint Returns (DUE BY APRIL 15, 2019)
Tax Rates	Taxable Income
Individual Returns	Joint Returns
10%	$0 to $9,525	$0 to $19,050
12%	$9,526 to $38,700	$19,051 to $77,400
22%	$38,701 to $82,500	$77,401 to $165,000
24%	$82,501 to $157,500	$165,001 to $315,000
32%	$157,501 to $200,000	$315,001 to $400,000
35%	$200,001 to $500,000	$400,001 to $600,000
37%	Over $500,000	Over $600,000
Example Tax Liabilities, Average Tax, and Marginal Tax
MyLab Finance Solution Video
Consider the Ellis sisters, Joni and Cara. Both are single. Joni’s taxable income is $50,000. Cara’s is $100,000. Using the tax rates and income brackets in Table 1.2, we can calculate their taxes as follows:

Notice that Joni pays about 13.9% of her income in taxes ) while Cara’s taxes amount to 18.3% of her income ). The progressive nature of the federal income tax structure means that Cara pays a higher fraction of her income in taxes—although her taxable income is twice Joni’s, Cara’s income tax is about 2.6 times Joni’s. Because Cara’s income is higher than Joni’s, she faces a higher marginal tax rate. Cara’s last dollar of income is taxed at a 24% rate, whereas Joni’s last dollar is taxed at just 22%. You can build a spreadsheet model like the one below to automate these calculations, so you can calculate the tax bill for an individual taxpayer with any income level.

NOTE This icon indicates that there is a downloadable Excel file available on MyLab Finance that matches the text’s content at the point where the icon appears.



1.3-3 Full Alternative Text
Capital Gains and Losses
A capital asset is property owned and used by the taxpayer for personal reasons, pleasure, or investment. The most common types are securities and real estate, including one’s home. A capital gain represents the amount by which the proceeds from the sale of a capital asset exceed its original purchase price. Under current tax law, several tax rates apply to capital gains income depending on the length of the investment holding period and the taxpayer’s income. For assets held more than 12 months, the tax law classifies capital gains as long term and taxes them at rates ranging from 0% for low-income taxpayers to 23.8% for high-income earners. For assets held less than 12 months, the law classifies capital gains as short term and taxes them at the ordinary income rates in Table 1.2. Table 1.3 shows the 2018 tax brackets and rates that apply to long-term capital gains for single taxpayers and married taxpayers filing a joint return. For single taxpayers earning more than $200,000 (or married taxpayers earning more than $250,000), an additional 3.8% tax on investment income applies, bringing the top tax rate on long-term capital gains to 23.8%.

Table 1.3 Federal Income Long-Term Capital Gains Tax Rates and Brackets for Individual and Joint Returns (DUE BY APRIL 15, 2019)
Tax Rates	Taxable Income
Individual Returns	Joint Returns
0%	$0 to $38,600	$0 to $77,200
15%	$38,601 to $425,800	$77,201 to $479,000
20%	Over $425,800	Over $479,000
Example Capital Gains and Total Tax
MyLab Finance Solution Video
Imagine that James McFail, a single person who has other taxable income totalling $75,000, sold 500 shares of stock at $12 per share. He purchased this stock at $10 per share. The total capital gain on this transaction was James’s taxable income totals $76,000, and he is in the 22% tax bracket (see Table 1.2).

If James held the asset for more than 12 months, based on his income he would have to pay a 15% tax on the $1,000 capital gain. His total tax would be calculated as follows:

James’s total tax would be $12,589.50. Had his other taxable income been below $38,600, James would have owed no tax on the capital gain. Had James held the asset for fewer than 12 months, his $1,000 capital gain would have been taxed as ordinary income, which in James’s case would result in a 22% rate.

Capital gains are appealing because investors do not pay taxes on those gains until they are realized. For example, if an investor purchased stock for $50 that at the end of the tax year has a market price of $60, the investor has a “paper gain” of $10. This paper (unrealized) gain is not taxable because the investor still owns the stock. Only realized gains are taxed. If the investor sold the stock for $60 per share during the tax year, he would have a realized—and therefore taxable—gain of $10 per share.

A capital loss results when a capital asset is worth less than its original purchase price. Like gains, capital losses may be realized or unrealized, but only realized losses have tax consequences. Before calculating taxes, investors net out all capital gains and losses. Taxpayers can apply up to $3,000 of net losses against ordinary income in any year. Losses that cannot be applied in the current year may be carried forward and used to offset future income, subject to certain conditions.

Watch Your Behavior
Cut Your Taxes and Your Losses
Several researchers have found that investors are very reluctant to sell stocks that have gone down in value, presumably because they hope to “get even” in the future. Holding losers rather than selling them is often a mistake because the tax code provides an incentive to sell these stocks. Investors can deduct realized investment losses (up to a point) against other forms of income, thereby lowering their tax liabilities.

Investments and Taxes
The opportunities created by the tax laws make tax planning important to investors. Tax planning involves looking at earnings, both current and projected, and developing strategies that will defer and minimize taxes. The tax plan should guide investment activities to achieve maximum after-tax returns (for an acceptable risk level) over the long run.

Because investors do not pay capital gains taxes until realizing gains, they can control the timing of capital gains taxes. However, investments that are likely to produce the largest capital gains generally have higher risk than those that provide significant current income. Therefore, investors should not choose investments solely on tax considerations. Instead they must strike a balance of tax benefits, investment returns, and risk. It is the after-tax return and associated risk that matter.

Tax-Advantaged Retirement Savings Plans
The federal government has established a number of plans that offer special tax incentives designed to encourage people to save for retirement. Those that are employer sponsored include profit-sharing plans, thrift and savings plans, and 401(k) plans. These plans allow employees to defer paying taxes on funds that they save and invest during their working years until they withdraw those funds during retirement. Individuals who are self-employed can set up their own tax-sheltered retirement programs such as Keogh plans and SEP-IRAs. Other savings plans with tax advantages are not tied directly to the employer. Almost anyone can set up an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), although the law limits the tax benefits of these plans for high-income taxpayers. In a traditional IRA, investors do not pay taxes on contributions to the plan or on investment earnings generated on those contributions until they withdraw funds during retirement. In a Roth IRA, contributions are taxed up front, but subsequent investment earnings and withdrawals are tax-free. For most people, these plans offer an attractive way to both accumulate funds for retirement and reduce taxes.

Investing over the Life Cycle

Investors tend to follow different investment philosophies as they move through different stages of life. Most tend to be more aggressive when they’re young and more conservative as they grow older. Typically, investors move through these investment stages:


1.3-5 Full Alternative Text
Most investors in their twenties and thirties prefer high-risk, growth-oriented investments that stress capital gains rather than current income. Young investors can tolerate more risk because their investment horizon is longer, and they have more time to make adjustments to their savings objectives if their portfolios suffer large losses. For these reasons, portfolios of young investors often heavily weight common stocks, particularly smaller companies and firms in fast-growing industries.

NOTE An Advisor’s Perspective boxes consist of short video clips of professional investment advisors who share their practical insights about the material covered in this text.
An Advisor’s Perspective

Rick Loek, CEO, Calrima Financial and Insurance Agency
“There are three financial phases that we go through in life.”

MyLab Finance

As investors approach middle age, family demands and responsibilities such as educational expenses and retirement contributions become more important. The whole portfolio often shifts to a less aggressive posture. Stocks that offer a balance between growth and income—high-grade bonds, preferred stocks, convertibles, and mutual funds—are all widely used at this stage.

Finally, when investors approach their retirement years, preservation of capital and current income become the principal concerns. A secure, high income stream is paramount. Investors place less emphasis on growing their portfolio. Instead, they structure their portfolios to generate regular cash flow with relatively low exposure to risk. The investment portfolio now becomes highly conservative. It consists of low-risk income stocks and mutual funds, government bonds, quality corporate bonds, bank certificates of deposit (CDs), and other short-term investments. At this stage, investors reap the rewards of a lifetime of saving and investing.

Investing over the Business Cycle

The returns on common stocks and other equity-related securities (convertible securities, stock mutual funds, stock options, and stock index futures) respond sharply to macroeconomic conditions. The business cycle refers to the recurring sequence of growth and decline, boom and recession that characterizes all economies. The business cycle reflects the current status of economic variables such as gross domestic product (GDP), industrial production, personal disposable income, the unemployment rate, and more.

An expanding business cycle reflects a strong economy. Stocks tend to be a leading indicator of the business cycle, meaning that stock prices often rise prior to periods when business is good and profits are up. Growth-oriented and speculative stocks tend to do especially well in strong markets. To a lesser extent, so do low-risk and income-oriented stocks. In contrast, stock values often fall several months before periods when economic activity is declining. The reason that stocks move ahead of the business cycle is that stock prices reflect investors’ beliefs about companies’ future prospects. When investors believe that business conditions will deteriorate, stock prices fall even before those poor business conditions materialize. Of course, the same thing happens in reverse when investors believe the economy will perform better. Stock prices rise in anticipation of strong future economic performance.

Panel A of Table 1.4 confirms this pattern. The table shows that over the past 15 recessions, covering the period from 1926 to 2018, the average monthly return on the stock market was lower in the six months leading up to a recession than it was during the recession (0.37%). The table also shows that on average the stock market performs very well (1.75% per month) in the first 12 months after a recession ends.

Table 1.4 Performance of Stocks Before, During, and After Recessions
Panel A Average Monthly Return (%)
Dates of Prior Recessions	6 Months Prior to Recession	During Recession	12 Months After Recession
0.37	1.75
Panel B Total Return (%)
October 1926 to November 1927	18.01	33.41	41.66
August 1929 to March 1933	9.27		96.77
May 1937 to June 1938			100.30
February 1945 to October 1945	9.95	22.80	
November 1948 to October 1949	5.32	5.06	28.45
July 1953 to May 1954		26.73	36.31
August 1957 to April 1958	9.31		39.73
April 1960 to February 1961		19.42	13.08
December 1969 to November 1970			12.95
November 1973 to March 1975	4.49		28.52
January 1980 to July 1980	9.75	16.18	15.65
July 1981 to November 1982	1.15	12.67	25.74
July 1990 to March 1991	1.84	7.09	13.72
March 2001 to November 2001			
December 2007 to June 2009			16.45
Returns on bonds and other forms of fixed-income securities (bond funds and preferred stocks) also respond to the business cycle because they are highly sensitive to interest-rate movements. In fact, no factor has more to do with changing bond prices and returns than changes in interest rates. Interest rates and bond prices move in opposite directions (Chapters 10 and 11). Therefore, rising interest rates reduce the returns on bonds already held in an investor’s portfolio. Of course, high interest rates enhance the attractiveness of new bonds because these bonds must offer high returns to attract investors.

Watch Your Behavior

James Grant, Founder, Grant’s Interest Rate Observer
“The biggest mistake we investors make is being human.”

MyLab Finance
If you had a crystal ball and could foresee the future, our advice to you would be to load up on high-risk investments each time the economy was nearing the end of a recession and to discard those investments in favor of safer assets near the end of each economic boom. Of course, no one has such a crystal ball, and unfortunately professional economic forecasters and investment professionals do not have a particularly strong record at predicting turns in the economy and financial markets. Panel B of Table 1.4 illustrates that even if you knew when recessions would start and end, there would still be a high degree of uncertainty about the returns you could earn by moving in and out of the stock market around recessions. For example, during the most recent recession (2007 to 2009), stocks lost 34.46% of their value, so having perfect foresight about that event and avoiding the stock market during that period would have paid off. But notice that the stock market gained value in eight of the past 15 recessions! In other words, even if you knew when a recession would start and end, you wouldn’t know whether it would be wise to stay invested in stocks or to get out.

Perhaps the best advice that we can offer regarding investments and the business cycle is this: Do not overreact to the ups and downs that appear to be an unavoidable (and unpredictable) part of economic life. Investors who load up on risky assets after the market has already risen from its bottom and who dump their stocks after the market has begun a slide will probably perform worse than investors who apply a consistent investment strategy over many years through many business cycles.

NOTE Famous Failures in Finance boxes highlight important problems that sometimes occur in the investments field. These problems may deal with ethical lapses, as in the box below, or they may involve various kinds of failures that take place in the marketplace.
Famous Failures In Finance

Ethical Failure—Massaging the Numbers
In recent years, business headlines were full of allegations of massive financial fraud committed by prominent business leaders. These allegations shocked the investment community and resulted in spectacular bankruptcies of large corporations. Civil and criminal charges against the key executives involved in the fraud soon followed. Among the list of business leaders charged or convicted of financial fraud were Bernie Madoff, Ramalinga Raju of Satyam Computer Services, Hank Greenberg of American International Group (AIG), and David Glenn of Freddie Mac.

In many cases, the primary weapon of fraudulent CEOs was the use of corporate accounting to report huge, fictitious profits or hide financial problems. To cite just one example, prior to its 2008 bankruptcy, the investment banking firm Lehman Brothers had repeatedly engaged in a transaction known as Repo 105. In this transaction, just before it issued a quarterly financial report, Lehman Brothers essentially borrowed money on a short-term basis (usually for 7 to 10 days) from another entity. However, on Lehman’s balance sheet that loan was recorded as an asset sale. On Lehman’s publicly released financial statements, this transaction made it appear that Lehman Brothers had more cash and less debt than it actually did. More than 16 years after the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, legislation designed to prevent this kind of corporate fraud, investors have learned the hard way that corporate fraud is a significant risk that remains difficult to anticipate or detect until it is too late.

Critical Thinking Question

Why do you think Lehman engaged in Repo 105 transactions?

Concepts In Review

Answers available at http://www.pearson.com/mylab/finance

1.12 What should an investor establish before developing and executing an investment program? Briefly describe the elements of an investment policy statement.

1.13 Define and differentiate among the following. Explain how each is related to federal income taxes.

Active income
Portfolio and passive income
Capital gain
Capital loss
Tax planning
Tax-advantaged retirement investments
1.14 Describe the differing investment philosophies typically applied during each of the following stages of an investor’s life cycle.

Youth (ages 20 to 45)
Middle age (ages 46 to 60)
Retirement years (age 61 and older)
1.15 Discuss the relation between stock prices and the business cycle.

Meeting Liquidity Needs with Short-Term Investments
LG 5
Liquidity is the ability to convert an investment into cash quickly with little or no loss in value. A checking account is highly liquid. Stocks and bonds are a little less liquid because there is no assurance that you will be able to quickly sell them without having to cut the price to attract a buyer and because selling these securities usually triggers various transactions costs. Real estate is even less liquid and may take weeks or months to sell even if you are willing to accept a very low price. Unexpected life events such as illness and unemployment sometimes require individuals to draw on their savings to meet daily expenses, so planning for and providing for adequate liquidity is an important part of an investment plan.

The Role of Short-Term Investments

Short-term investments represent an important part of most savings and investment programs. They generate income, although with the prevailing near-zero interest rates in recent years, the income provided by these investments has been quite low. However, their primary function is to provide a pool of reserves for emergencies or simply to accumulate funds for some specific purpose. As a rule of thumb, financial planners often suggest that individuals hold cash reserves equivalent to three to six months of their after-tax salary, and typically they would invest this type of emergency fund in safe, liquid, short-term investments.

Some individuals choose to hold short-term investments because they simply do not want to take the risk inherent in many types of long-term investments. Certainly there are periods when these low-risk investments perform better than stocks and bonds. Regardless of the motives for holding short-term investments, investors should evaluate them in terms of their risk and return, just as they would longer-term investments.

Famous Failures In Finance

A Run for the Money
During the Great Depression, individuals became fearful about the ability of banks to survive, and this prompted a great number of bank runs. One of these featured prominently in Frank Capra’s classic film It’s A Wonderful Life. In a bank run many of a bank’s depositors attempt to withdraw money from their accounts at the same time. Because the bank holds only a small fraction of its deposits as cash in a vault, a run can cause a bank to run out of cash quickly and fail as a result. In fact, thousands of banks failed in the 1930s for this reason. To protect banks against runs, the U.S. government created a deposit insurance program via the Banking Act of 1933, which guaranteed that each depositor’s money (up to $2,500) would be returned to him or her in the event of a bank failure. This led to fewer bank runs and fewer bank failures. In 1934 only nine banks failed, compared with more than 9,000 from 1929 to 1933.

Just a decade ago, during the financial crisis, depositors began to question the safety of banks and other financial institutions not only in the United States but also in many other countries. In an attempt to reassure depositors and to prevent a classic bank run, several countries increased the limit on their deposit insurance programs. In 2008 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) increased the amount of insured deposits from $100,000 to $250,000. Greece, Poland, Sweden, Denmark, and the United Kingdom all increased their limits on insured deposits. In Greece and Ireland the limit was entirely eliminated, committing those governments to cover 100% of customers’ deposits at insured financial institutions. As part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the FDIC announced in 2010 that it would temporarily provide unlimited insurance for non-interest-bearing accounts at all FDIC-insured institutions. Today the deposit insurance limit is $250,000 per depositor at each bank.

Interest on Short-Term Investments
Short-term investments earn interest in one of two ways. Some investments, such as savings accounts, pay a stated rate of interest, which, as the name implies, is just the stated rate on the account.

Alternatively, some short-term investments earn interest on a discount basis. This means that investors buy the security at a price below its redemption value (or face value), and the difference between what they pay to acquire the asset and what they receive when it matures is the interest the investment will earn. U.S. Treasury bills (T-bills), for example, are issued on a discount basis.

An Advisor’s Perspective

James Grant, Founder, Grant’s Interest Rate Observer
“Low rates present many difficulties to the wary and the unwary.”

MyLab Finance
Risk Characteristics
Short-term investments are generally not very risky. Their primary risk results from inflation risk—the potential loss of purchasing power that may occur if the rate of return on these investments is less than the inflation rate. Investors holding money in bank savings accounts have experienced this outcome regularly in recent years. The average interest rate on bank money market savings accounts has been below 0.5% since 2010, but over that same period, the average annual inflation rate has been about 1.7%. Usually, short-term investments provide rates of return that are slightly higher than the inflation rate, but actions by the U.S. Federal Reserve have kept short-term interest rates at historically low levels since the last recession.

The risk of default—nonpayment—is almost nonexistent with short-term investments. The reason is that issuers of most short-term investments are highly reputable institutions, such as the U.S. Treasury, large banks, and major corporations. In addition, government agencies insure deposits in commercial banks, savings and loans, savings banks, and credit unions for up to $250,000 per account. Finally, because the value of short-term investments does not change much in response to changing interest rates, exposure to capital loss is correspondingly low.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Short-Term Investments
As noted, the major advantages of short-term investments are their high liquidity and low risk. Most are available from local financial institutions and are easy to convert to cash. Finally, because the returns on short-term investments usually vary with inflation and market interest rates, investors can readily capture higher returns as rates move up. On the negative side, when interest rates go down, returns drop as well. Perhaps their biggest disadvantage is their relatively low return. Because these securities are generally so low in risk, the returns on short-term investments average less than the returns on long-term investments.

Common Short-Term Investments

Individual investors have access to a variety of short-term investments. Some are deposit-type accounts where investors can place money, earn a relatively low rate of interest, and conveniently withdraw funds at their discretion. Part A of Table 1.5 summarizes the common deposit-type accounts. The federal government also issues short-term investments. Part B of Table 1.5 summarizes basic features of many of those instruments. The final group of short-term investments includes nongovernment instruments, typically issued by a financial institution or a corporation. Part C of Table 1.5 summarizes these investments.

Table 1.5 Common Short-Term Investments
Part A. Deposit-Type Accounts
Type of Account	Description	Minimum Balance	Interest Rate	Federal Insurance
Passbook savings account	Savings accounts offered by banks.* Used primarily for convenience or if investors lack sufficient funds to purchase other short-term investments.	Typically none	0.25%–4% depending on economy	Up to $250,000 per deposit.
Negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) account	Bank checking account that pays interest on balances.	No legal minimum, but often set at $500 to $1,000	At or near passbook rates	Up to $250,000 per deposit.
Money market deposit account (MMDA)	Bank deposit account with limited check-writing privileges.	No legal minimum, but often set at about $2,500	Typically slightly above passbook rate	Up to $250,000 per deposit.
Asset management account	Deposit account at bank, brokerage house, mutual fund, or insurance company that combines checking, investing, and borrowing. Automatically “sweeps” excess balances into short-term investments and borrows to meet shortages.	Typically $5,000 to $20,000	Similar to MMDAs	Up to $250,000 per deposit in banks. Varies in other institutions.
Part B. Federal Government Issues
Security	Issuer	Description	Initial Maturity	Risk and Return
I bonds	U.S. Treasury	Savings bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury in denominations as low as $25; earn an interest rate that varies with the inflation rate; interest is exempt from state and local taxes.	30 years, but redeemable after 1 year	Lowest, virtually risk free
Treasury bills	U.S. Treasury	Issued weekly at auction; sold at a discount; strong secondary market; exempt from local and state income taxes.	1 year or less	Lowest, virtually risk free
Part C. Nongovernment Issues
Security	Issuer	Description	Initial Maturity	Risk and Return
Certificates of deposit (CDs)	Commercial banks	Cash deposits in commercial banks; amounts and maturities tailored to investor’s needs.	1 month and longer	Higher than U.S. Treasury issues and comparable to commercial paper
Commercial paper	Corporation with a high credit standing	Unsecured note of issuer; large denominations.	3 to 270 days	Higher than U.S. Treasury issues and comparable to CDs
Banker’s acceptances	Banks	Analogous to a postdated check on an account with overdraft protection; a time draft drawn on a customer’s account, guaranteed by a bank; bank’s “acceptance” makes the trade a tradable instrument.	30 to 180 days	About the same as CDs and commercial paper but higher than U.S. Treasury issues
Money market mutual funds (money funds)	Professional portfolio management companies	Professionally managed portfolios of marketable securities; provide instant liquidity.	None—depends on wishes of investor	Vary, but generally higher than U.S. Treasury issues and comparable to CDs and commercial paper
* The term bank refers to commercial banks, savings and loans (S&Ls), savings banks, and credit unions.
[Return to reference]

Investment Suitability

Individual investors use short-term investments for both savings and investment. When the savings motive is paramount, investors use these assets to maintain a desired level of savings that will be available if the need arises—in essence, to provide safety and security. For this purpose, an investment’s return is less important than its safety, liquidity, and convenience. Passbook savings accounts and NOW (negotiable order of withdrawal) accounts are examples of short-term investments that fulfill investors’ short-term savings needs.

When investors use short-term securities for investment purposes, the return that these instruments provide is often just as important as their liquidity. Most investors will hold at least a part of their portfolio in short-term, highly liquid securities, if for no other reason than to be able to act on unanticipated investment opportunities. Some investors, in fact, devote all or most of their portfolios to such securities.

Investors also use short-term securities as a temporary place to “park” funds before deciding where to invest the money on a long-term basis. An investor who just sold some stock but does not have a suitable long-term investment alternative might place the proceeds in a money fund until he or she finds a longer-term use for them. Investors buying short-term securities for this warehousing function prefer the securities offering the highest returns—like money market deposit accounts (MMDAs), CDs, commercial paper, banker’s acceptances, and money funds.

To decide which securities are most appropriate for a particular situation, investors need to consider such characteristics as availability, safety, liquidity, and rate of return. Although all investments we have discussed satisfy the basic liquidity demand, they do so to varying degrees. A NOW account, which is an interest-earning deposit account on which an investor may write an unlimited number of checks, is unquestionably the most liquid of all. A certificate of deposit, on the other hand, is not so liquid because early redemption involves an interest penalty. Table 1.6 summarizes the key characteristics of the short-term investments described in Table 1.5. The letter grade assigned for each characteristic reflects an estimate of the investment’s quality in that area. For example, money market mutual funds (money funds) rate only a B+ on liquidity because withdrawals must usually be made in a minimum amount of $250 to $500. NOW accounts are somewhat better in this respect because a withdrawal can be for any amount. Rates on short-term investments tend to be low. Among the investments listed in Table 1.6, the rates on NOW and passbook savings accounts are typically lowest, and the rates on I bonds are the highest. In 2018 rates on all of these instruments were low by historical standards. For example, a large, 1-year CD offered investors a return of 2%. You should note, though, that if an investment scores lower on availability, safety, or liquidity, it will generally offer a higher rate.

Table 1.6 A Scorecard for Short-Term Investment
Type of Investment	Availability	Safety	Liquidity	Typical Rate in 2018
NOW account				0.20%
Passbook savings account				0.40%
Money market mutual fund (money fund)	B	A/A+		1.75%
Money market deposit account (MMDA)				1.25%
Asset management account				0.50%
U.S. Treasury bill (1 year)				2.10%
Banker’s acceptance (90 day)				1.75%
Commercial paper (90 day)				2.00%
Certificate of deposit (1 year, large denomination)				2.04%
I bonds				2.50%
Concepts In Review
Answers available at http://www.pearson.com/mylab/finance

1.16 What makes an asset liquid? Why hold liquid assets? Would 100 shares of IBM stock be considered a liquid investment? Explain.

1.17 Explain the characteristics of short-term investments with respect to purchasing power and default risk.

1.18 Briefly describe the key features and differences among the following deposit accounts.

Passbook savings account
NOW account
Money market deposit account
Asset management account
1.19 Define, compare, and contrast the following short-term investments.

I bonds
U.S. Treasury bills
Certificates of deposit
Commercial paper
Banker’s acceptances
Money market mutual funds (money funds)

Careers in Finance
LG 6
Regardless of the job title, a career in finance requires an understanding of the investment environment. The principles presented in this text will provide an initial foundation in investments essential to pursuing one of the many rewarding career paths. Well-prepared and enthusiastic students have access to a wide variety of job opportunities. Many people who pursue a career in the investments field obtain one of two professional certifications: Certified Financial Planner (CFP®) or Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA). Each of these certifications can help advance a career, although the requirements and the focus of each certification are somewhat different.

An Advisor’s Perspective

Bryan Sweet, Founder and CEO, Sweet Financial Services
“The CFP gives you confidence when speaking to clients.”

MyLab Finance
The CFP® program is primarily designed for people who want to work directly with clients, helping them develop and execute investment plans. Obtaining the CFP® credential requires a bachelor’s degree in finance or a related field and a passing grade on the six-hour CFP® Certification Exam, which in 2018 had a pass rate of 64%. The exam focuses heavily on aspects of the advisor–client relationship including establishing and defining client relationships, analyzing a client’s current financial position, and developing, communicating, implementing, and monitoring investment recommendations. In addition to passing the exam, earning the CFP® requires three years of professional work experience in financial planning and a commitment to abide by a code of ethics established by the CFP® Board. People with the CFP® credential typically work as financial advisors, either in their own practice or as part of a larger team.

The CFA program’s focus is more appropriate for people who want to work as institutional investors, for example as a financial analyst on Wall Street. CFAs must pass a series of three grueling six-hour exams (Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3), each of which usually requires hundreds of hours of study. Typically the pass rate on these exams is 50% or less. Examples of CFA exam questions appear scattered throughout this text and on MyLab Finance. Prospective CFAs also need a bachelor’s degree (in any field) simply to register for the exam. In addition, they must have four years of qualified investment work experience, and they must adhere to the CFA Institute’s Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. The most common job held by CFAs is portfolio manager, but people with this certification also work as consultants, financial analysts inside corporations, traders, risk managers, and more.

With or without any of these professional credentials, there are many career opportunities open to those who are well trained in investments. Some of the industries with investments-oriented career opportunities are commercial banking, corporate finance, financial planning, insurance, investment banking, and investment management.

Commercial Banking

Commercial banks provide banking services to individuals and businesses alike. In spite of considerable consolidation within the banking sector, more people work in commercial banking than in any other area of the financial services industry.

Due to the vast range of services they provide, commercial banks offer a tremendous variety of career opportunities, many of which require investments training. Commercial banks offer jobs such as mortgage lender, mortgage underwriter, corporate lender, asset manager, leasing, consumer credit or trade credit analyst, and portfolio manager.

Corporate Finance

Corporations offer several rewarding job opportunities for those with investments expertise. Corporations require financial professionals to manage cash and short-term investments, raise and manage long-term financing, evaluate and undertake investments, and interface with investors and the financial community.

The top finance job in a corporation is that of the chief financial officer (CFO). The CFO manages the firm’s capital resources and capital investments. Investment principles are important to CFOs because so much of a CFO’s job revolves around communication with investors. A CFO must understand how investors view the firm and value the securities the firm has issued. A CFO’s job (and most other corporate finance jobs) is typically focused on increasing a firm’s value through successful business decisions. More so than other finance-related jobs, corporate finance jobs require a broad understanding of the various functional areas within the corporate setting (e.g., operations, marketing, and accounting) and how these areas contribute to the corporate finance goals.

Financial Planning

A financial planner counsels clients on how to establish and achieve their short- and long-term financial goals. Personal financial planners provide financial advice relating to education, retirement, investment, insurance, tax, and estate planning. Business owners consult them for advice on issues such as cash flow management, investment planning, risk management and insurance planning, tax planning, and business succession planning.

Watch Your Behavior
Misguided Advisors
Critics of the financial advising industry have long argued that conflicts of interest lead advisors to give more guidance to their clients, for example by persuading them to invest in high-cost, actively managed mutual funds rather than in low-cost index funds. New research suggests that these advisors follow their own advice when they invest their own money, putting too much in costly funds, diversifying too little, and chasing returns. The study concludes that financial planners and stockbrokers mislead their clients not only because they have a financial incentive to do so but also because they believe their own bad advice.

(Source: Based on Linnainmaa, Juhani T., Brian T. Melzer, and Alessandro Previtero, The Misguided Beliefs of Financial Advisors, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.)
An ability to clarify objectives, assess risks, and develop strategic plans is essential for financial planners. For example, if a client desires to send a child to college someday, what savings or investment strategies are best suited to meet that client’s goals? Financial planners can work within a large financial services company such as ING, within a small practice, or for themselves.

Insurance

The insurance business is a trillion-dollar industry that serves both individual and business clients. There are two prominent finance jobs in insurance. The first involves providing individuals or businesses with products that provide cash payments when unfavorable events (e.g., sickness, death, property damage due to fire or natural disaster) occur, and the second involves investing the premiums that customers pay when they buy insurance. Individuals and businesses purchase insurance products in order to protect themselves from catastrophic losses or to guarantee certain outcomes. Insurers collect premiums and fees for the services they provide and they invest those funds in assets so that when customers submit claims, the insurance company will have the cash to fulfill the financial promises they made to their customers. In 2018 the U.S. insurance industry managed roughly $7 trillion in assets, and it employed large numbers of highly trained investment specialists.

Investment Banking

Investment banks help firms and governments raise money by issuing stocks and bonds, and they facilitate trading activities of both institutional and retail investors by making markets. Their in-house security analysts provide research on both equity and fixed-income securities, and they provide financial advice to and manage financial assets for high net worth individuals, firms, institutions, and governments. Investment banks even provide their clients with quantitative analysis or program trading and consultation on mergers and acquisitions.

The investment banking industry changed dramatically during the 2008 financial crisis. Many investment banks invested heavily in securities tied to U.S. real estate values, and when home prices began to drop, the losses on banks’ investments began to mount. Several prominent investment banks either went bankrupt or were acquired by other banks. Since then, the industry has recovered to a degree, but there are fewer professionals working in investment banks today than there were a decade ago.

Investment Management

As the name implies, investment management is all about managing money for clients. The role of an investment manager includes elements of financial analysis, asset selection, security (e.g., stock or bond) selection, and investment implementation and monitoring. Most investment management is done on behalf of a pool of investors whose investments comprise a fund. Some common examples of managed funds are bank trust funds, pension funds, mutual funds, exchange-traded funds, and hedge funds.

Money managers often specialize in managing a portfolio of a particular type of security. Some money managers buy and hold fixed-income securities, including mortgage-backed securities, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, agency securities, and asset-backed securities. Others focus on equities, including small stocks, large caps, and emerging market stocks. Some managers invest only in domestic securities, while others buy securities in markets all over the world. As noted earlier in this chapter, passively managed funds (i.e., those that make no attempt to identify and invest in undervalued securities) have been gaining market share at the expense of actively managed funds for at least a decade.

Table 1.7 lists average salaries and required years of experience for a variety of jobs in the commercial banking, corporate finance, investment banking, and investment management fields. Many of these jobs have an investments focus, but not all do. Keep in mind that there is substantial variation around these averages. Larger firms and firms in areas with higher costs of living tend to pay more. For entry-level positions, an individual’s salary might be higher or lower than the average reported here based on the candidate’s undergraduate major, grade point average, extracurricular activities, or simply how they handle a job interview. Salaries reported in Table 1.7 also do not include bonuses, which can be considerable in certain industries (such as investment banking). Bonuses tend to account for a larger fraction of total pay in jobs that require more experience. Still, the table conveys the idea that job opportunities in finance are quite attractive.

Table 1.7 Average Salaries for Various Finance Jobs (2018)
Job Title	Salary	Years of Experience
Commercial Banking
Commercial credit analyst, Jr.	$  47,392	0
Commercial credit analyst, Sr.	$ 92,616	7
Lending officer, Jr.	$  86,801	8
Lending officer, Sr.	$ 160,611	12
Corporate Finance
Financial analyst, Jr.	$ 55,693	0
Financial analyst, Sr.	$100,312	7
Assistant controller	$125,222	7
Investor relations director	$163,324	10
Treasurer	$195,014	7
Chief financial officer	$361,258	15
Investment Banking
Analyst	$ 77,000	0
Associate	$130,000	3
Managing director	$834,000	18
Investment Management
Securities analyst	$114,663	2
Investment specialist	$100,406	2
Portfolio manager	$109,495	5
Investment operations manager	$133,464	7
(Sources: Data from Salary.com; data for investment banking from https://news.efinancialcareers.com/uk-en/185046/much-earn-now-investment-banker-30s

Developing Skills for Your Career

A basic knowledge of investments is useful to almost anyone regardless of their chosen career path. Professionals from every field have to make investment decisions with their own money such as how much to save, what types of assets to invest in, or whether to invest following active or passive strategies. Fortunately, the skills needed to make good investment decisions are applicable to business decisions in general, and therefore they can help you land and succeed in a job even if you are not working in the investments field (or in a finance job). Below we highlight skills you can develop while working through this book.

Critical Thinking
For many people working in a business, it is not obvious how day-to-day decisions drive a firm’s stock price up and down. The stock price is one measure of a firm’s success, so the same factors that investors think about in determining what a stock is worth are important to managers running the firm that issued the stock. In this text, we emphasize that good investment decisions balance risk and return, and that is true of most business decisions as well. A critical evaluation of any proposed course of action requires an analysis of the risks of that action as well as its potential rewards. Virtually every chapter in this text provides guidance about how to make critical judgments regarding either the risks or the rewards (or both) tied to investment decisions. By mastering those chapters you will learn how to apply criteria that lead to better decisions. You will learn the assumptions behind and the key relationships driving financial models, so even if your job does not involve building those models, you can help shape them by providing the data and analysis that the financial analysts at your firm use to provide financial justifications for key decisions. Your understanding of financial principles will also help you to identify weaknesses in financial analysis which, left uncorrected, might lead to suboptimal decisions.

Communication and Collaboration
In most large businesses today, employees work in cross-functional teams. If your aim is to work in marketing or supply chain or even general management, rest assured that working with a colleague from the finance department will be part of your regular routine. Thus, you need to understand how financial people think and the vocabulary they use to communicate with them effectively and persuasively. Developing a basic financial proficiency will help you gather and organize the information that the financial analyst on your team needs to demonstrate the value of your team’s work to the larger organization.

Financial Computing Skills
Though an in-depth discussion of using Excel or other computer programs to build complex financial models is beyond the scope of this text, some of the Excel tools that see widespread practice in financial modeling are introduced. Even if your job does not involve building models in Excel, financial analysts in your firm will routinely present their analysis in that form, and your ability to respond and contribute to that analysis hinges upon your understanding of at least the basics of those models. Remember that finance is often the gatekeeper of corporate funds, so gaining support from the finance department may be an important step in marshaling the resources you need to do your job effectively. It’s easier to gain that support if you are conversant in the basics of financial modeling in Excel.

Concepts In Review
Answers available at http://www.pearson.com/mylab/finance

1.20 Why is an understanding of investment principles important to a senior manager working in corporate finance?

1.21 Why do insurance companies need employees with advanced training in investments?

MyLab Finance
Here is what you should know after reading this chapter. Mylab Finance will help you identify what you know and where to go when you need to practice.
What You Should Know	Key Terms	Where to Practice
NOTE The end-of-chapter summaries restate the chapter’s Learning Goals and review the key points of information related to each goal.	NOTE A list of Key Terms gathers in one place the new vocabulary presented in each chapter.	 
LG1

Understand the meaning of the term investment and list the attributes that distinguish one investment from another. An investment is any asset into which investors can place funds with the expectation of generating positive income and/or increasing their value. The returns from investing are received either as income or as increased value.

Some of the attributes that distinguish one type of investment from another include whether the investment is a security or property; direct or indirect; debt, equity, or derivative; low risk or high risk; short term or long term; and domestic or foreign.

debt, p. 4
derivative securities, p. 4
direct investment, p. 3
domestic investments, p. 5
equity, p. 4
foreign investments, p. 5
indirect investment, p. 3
investment, p. 2
liquidity, p. 2
long-term investments, p. 5
portfolio, p. 2
property, p. 2
returns, p. 2
risk, p. 4
securities, p. 2
short-term investments, p. 5
MyLab Finance Study Plan 1.1
LG2

Describe the investment process and types of investors. Financial institutions and financial markets bring together suppliers and demanders of funds. The dominant U.S. financial market is the securities market for stocks, bonds, and other securities. The participants in the investment process are government, business, and individuals. Only individuals are net suppliers of funds. Investors can be either individual investors or institutional investors.

diversification, p. 4
financial institutions, p. 5
financial markets, p. 5
individual investors, p. 6
institutional investors, p. 6
MyLab Finance Study Plan 1.2
LG3

Discuss the principal types of investments. Short-term investments have low risk. They are used to earn a return on temporarily idle funds, to serve as a primary investment for conservative investors, and to provide liquidity. Common stocks offer dividends and capital gains. Fixed-income securities—bonds, convertible securities, and preferred stock—offer fixed periodic returns with some potential for gain in value. Mutual funds allow investors to buy or sell interests in a professionally managed, diversified group of securities. Exchange-traded funds are similar to mutual funds except that they can be bought and sold on an exchange during the trading day. Hedge funds are also similar to mutual funds except that they are open only to relatively wealthy investors, they tend to make riskier investments, and they are subject to less regulation than mutual funds.

Derivative securities such as options and futures are high-risk investments. Options offer an opportunity to buy or sell another security at a specified price over a given period of time. Futures are contracts between a seller and a buyer for delivery of a specified commodity or financial instrument, at a specified future date, at an agreed-on price. Other popular investments include tax-advantaged investments, real estate, and tangibles.

bonds, p. 9
capital gains, p. 8
common stock, p. 7
convertible security, p. 9
dividends, p. 8
exchange-traded funds (ETF), p. 11
fixed-income securities, p. 9
futures, p. 12
hedge funds, p. 11
money funds, p. 10
money market mutual funds, p. 10
mutual fund, p. 10
options, p. 12
preferred stock, p. 9
real estate, p. 13
tangibles, p. 13
tax-advantaged investments, p. 13
MyLab Finance Study Plan 1.3
LG4

Describe the purpose and content of an investment policy statement, review fundamental tax considerations, and discuss investing over the life cycle. Investing should be driven by well-developed plans established to achieve specific goals. A good place to begin an investment plan is to create a written investment policy statement.

Investors must also consider the tax consequences associated with various investments and strategies. The key dimensions are ordinary income, capital gains and losses, tax planning, and tax-advantaged retirement plans.

The investments selected are affected by the investor’s stage in the life cycle and by economic cycles. Younger investors tend to prefer growth-oriented investments that stress capital gains. As they age, investors move to less risky securities. As they approach retirement, they become even more conservative. Some investments, such as stocks, behave as leading indicators of the state of the economy.

capital loss, p. 18
investment goals, p. 14
net losses, p. 18
tax planning, p. 18
MyLab Finance Study Plan 1.4
LG5

Describe the most common types of short-term investments. Liquidity needs can be met by investing in various short-term investments, which can earn interest at a stated rate or on a discount basis. They typically have low risk. Banks, the government, and brokerage firms offer numerous short-term investments. Their suitability depends on the investor’s attitude toward availability, safety, liquidity, and rate of return.

discount basis, p. 23
MyLab Finance Study Plan 1.5
LG6

Describe some of the main careers available to people with financial expertise and the role that investments play in each. Exciting and rewarding career opportunities in finance are available in many fields, such as commercial banking, corporate finance, financial planning, insurance, investment banking, and money management.

 	MyLab Finance Study Plan 1.6
Log into MyLab Finance, take a chapter test, and get a personalized Study Plan that tells you which concepts you understand and which ones you need to review. From there, MyLab Finance will give you further practice, tutorials, animations, videos, and guided solutions. Log into www.pearson.com/mylab/finance
NOTE The Discussion Questions at the end of the chapter ask you to analyze and synthesize information presented in the text. These questions, like all other end-of-chapter assignment materials, are keyed to the chapter’s learning goals.

Discussion Questions
Learning Objective 4

Q1.1 Assume that you are 35 years old, are married with two young children, are renting a condo, and have an annual income of $100,000. Use the following questions to guide your preparation of a rough investment plan consistent with these facts.
What are your key investment goals?
How might personal taxes affect your investment plans? Use current tax rates to assess their impact.
How might your stage in the life cycle affect the types of risks you might take?
Learning Objective 5

Q1.2 What role, if any, will short-term investments play in your portfolio? Why? Complete the following table for the short-term investments listed. Find their current yields online, and explain which, if any, you would include in your investment portfolio.
Type of Investment	Minimum Balance	Interest Rate	Federal Insurance	Method and Ease of Withdrawing Funds
a. Passbook savings account	None	 	Yes	In person or through teller machines; very easy
b. NOW account	 	 	 	Unlimited check-writing privileges
c. Money market deposit account (MMDA)	 	 	 	 
d. Asset management account	 	 	 	 
e. Series I savings bond	Virtually none	 	 	 
f. U.S. Treasury bill	 	 	 	 
g. Certificate of deposit (CD)	 	 	 	 
h. Commercial paper	 	 	 	 
i. Banker’s acceptance	 	 	 	 
j. Money market mutual fund (money fund)	 	 	 	 


Problems
All problems are available in MyLab Finance. The  icon indicates problems in Excel format available in MyLab Finance.

Learning Objective 4

P1.1 Stefani German, a 40-year-old woman, plans to retire at age 65, and she wants to accumulate $500,000 over the next 25 years to supplement the retirement programs provided by the federal government and her employer. She expects to earn an average annual return of about 5% by investing in a low-risk portfolio containing about 20% short-term securities, 30% common stock, and 50% bonds.
NOTE The problems at the end of the chapter offer opportunities to perform calculations using the tools and techniques learned in the chapter.
Stefani currently has $44,300 that at a 5% annual rate of return will grow to about $150,000 by her 65th birthday. (The $150,000 figure is found using time value of money techniques, Chapter 4 appendix.) Stefani consults a financial advisor to determine how much money she should save each year to meet her retirement savings objective. The advisor tells Stefani that if she saves about $20.95 each year, she will accumulate $1,000 by age 65. Saving five times that amount each year, $104.75, allows Stefani to accumulate roughly $5,000 by age 65.
How much additional money does Stefani need to accumulate over time to reach her goal of $500,000?
How much must Stefani save to accumulate the sum calculated in part a over the next 25 years?
 Learning Objective 5

P1.2 During 2018, the Smiths and the Joneses both filed joint tax returns. For the tax year ended December 31, 2018, the Smiths’ taxable income was $130,000, and the Joneses had total taxable income of $65,000.
Using the federal tax rates given in Table 1.2 for married couples filing joint returns, calculate the taxes for both the Smiths and the Joneses.
Calculate and compare the ratio of the Smiths’ to the Joneses’ taxable income and the ratio of the Smiths’ to the Joneses’ taxes. What does this demonstrate about the federal income tax structure?
Learning Objective 6

P1.3 Jason and Kerri Consalvo, both in their 50s, have $50,000 to invest and plan to retire in 10 years. They are considering two investments. The first is a utility company common stock that costs $50 per share and pays dividends of $2 per share per year. Note that these dividends will be taxed at the same rates that apply to long-term capital gains. The Consalvos do not expect the value of this stock to increase. The other investment under consideration is a highly rated corporate bond that currently sells for $1,000 and pays annual interest at a rate of 5%, or $50 per $1,000 invested. After 10 years, these bonds will be repaid at par, or $1,000 per $1,000 invested. Assume that the Consalvos keep the income from their investments but do not reinvest it (they keep the cash in a non-interest-bearing bank account). They will, however, need to pay income taxes on their investment income. If they buy the stock, they will sell it after 10 years. If they buy the bonds, in 10 years they will get back the amount they invested. The Consalvos are in the 32% tax bracket.
How many shares of the stock can the Consalvos buy?
How much will they receive after taxes each year in dividend income if they buy the stock?
What is the total amount they would have from their original $50,000 if they purchased the stock and all went as planned?
How much will they receive after taxes each year in interest if they purchase the bonds?
What is the total amount they would have from their original $50,000 if they purchased the bonds and all went as planned?
Based only on your calculations and ignoring other risk factors, should they buy the stock or the bonds?
Learning Objective 4

P1.4 Mike and Julie Bedard are a working couple. They will file a joint income tax return. This year, they have the following taxable income:
$125,000 from salary and wages (ordinary income)
$1,000 in interest income
$3,000 in dividend income
$2,000 in profit from sale of a stock they purchased two years ago
$2,000 in profit from a stock they purchased this year and sold this year
Use the federal income tax rates given in Table 1.2 to work this problem.
How much will Mike and Julie pay in federal income taxes on item 2 above?
How much will Mike and Julie pay in federal income taxes on item 3 above? (NOTE: Remember that dividend income and ordinary income are taxed differently.)
How much will Mike and Julie pay in federal income taxes on item 4 above?
How much will Mike and Julie pay in federal income taxes on item 5 above?
P1.5 Kim and Kanye have been dating for years and are now thinking about getting married. As a financially sophisticated couple, they want to think through the tax implications of their potential union.
Suppose Kim and Kanye both earn $70,000 (so their combined income is $140,000). Using the tax bracket information in Table 1.2 (or the Excel file available on MyLab Finance with the same information), calculate the combined tax bill that they would pay if they remain single, and compare that to the taxes they would pay if they were married and filed a joint return.
Now suppose that Kim and Kanye both earn $400,000 (so their combined income is $800,000). Calculate the combined tax bill that they would pay if they remain single, and compare that to the taxes that they would pay if they were married and filed a joint return.
What differences do you find in parts (a) and (b)? What is the cause of these differences?
 P1.6 Using the individual tax rate schedule shown in Table 1.2, perform the following:
Calculate the tax liability, after-tax earnings, and average tax rates for the following levels of partnership earnings before taxes: $10,000; $80,000; $300,000; $500,000; $1 million; $1.5 million; and $2 million.
Plot the average tax rates (measured on the y-axis) against the pretax income levels (measured on the x-axis). What generalization can be made concerning the relationship between these variables?
Visit http://www.pearson.com/mylab/finance for web exercises, spreadsheets, and other online resources.

NOTE Two Case Problems appear at the end of every chapter. They ask you to apply what you have learned in the chapter to a hypothetical investment situation.

Case Problem 1.1 Investments or Golf?
Learning Objective 1 Learning Objective 2 Learning Objective 3

Joshua Read and Emily Todd, senior accounting majors at a large Midwestern university, have been good friends since high school. Each has already found a job that will begin after graduation. Joshua has accepted a position as an internal auditor in a medium-size manufacturing firm. Emily will be working for one of the major public accounting firms. Each is looking forward to the challenge of a new career and to the prospect of achieving success both professionally and financially.

Joshua and Emily are preparing to register for their final semester. Each has one free elective to select. Joshua is considering taking a golf course offered by the physical education department, which he says will help him socialize in his business career. Emily is planning to take a basic investments course and has been trying to convince Joshua to take investments instead of golf. Joshua believes he doesn’t need to take investments because he already knows what common stock is. He believes that whenever he has accumulated excess funds, he can invest in the stock of a company that is doing well. Emily argues that there is much more to it than simply choosing common stock. She thinks that exposure to the field of investments would be more beneficial than learning to play golf.

Questions

Explain to Joshua the structure of the investment process and the economic importance of investing.
List and discuss the other types of investments with which Joshua is apparently unfamiliar.
Assuming that Joshua already gets plenty of exercise, what arguments would you give to convince him to take investments rather than golf?

Case Problem 1.2 Preparing Susan Bowen’s Investment Plan
Learning Objective 4 Learning Objective 5

Susan Bowen, who just turned 55, is employed as an administrative assistant for the Xcon Corporation, where she has worked for the past 20 years. She is in good health, lives alone, and has two grown children. A few months ago her husband died, leaving her with only their home and the proceeds from a $150,000 life insurance policy. After she paid medical and funeral expenses, $120,000 of the life insurance proceeds remained. In addition to the life insurance proceeds, Susan has $75,000 in a savings account, which she had accumulated over the past 10 years. Recognizing that she is within 10 years of retirement, Susan wishes to invest her limited resources so she will be able to live comfortably once she retires.

Susan is quite superstitious. After consulting with a number of psychics and studying her family tree, she is certain she will not live past 80. She plans to retire at either 62 or 65, whichever will allow her to meet her long-run financial goals. After talking with a number of knowledgeable individuals—including, of course, the psychics—Susan estimates she needs an income of $85,000 per year before taxes in retirement. That income must last 18 years if she retires at age 62 or 15 years if she retires when she is 65. As part of her financial plan, Susan intends to sell her home at retirement and rent an apartment. She has estimated that she will net $225,000 if she sells the house when she is 62 and $255,000 if she sells it when she is 65. Susan has no financial dependents and is not concerned about leaving a sizable estate to her heirs.

If Susan retires at 62, Social Security and an employer-sponsored pension plan combined will pay her $2,600 per month ($31,200 annually); if she retires when she is 65, her total retirement income will be $3,200 per month ($38,400 annually). Susan has already decided that when she retires she will spend all of her savings to buy an annuity that will provide a stream of annual income that will last until her 80th birthday. If Susan retires and buys an annuity at age 62, for each $1,000 that she puts into the annuity she will receive an annual $79 payment for the subsequent 18 years. If she waits until age 65 to retire, each $1,000 spent on the annuity will produce an annual payment of $89.94 for the 15 years.

Susan plans to place any funds currently available into a savings account paying 3% compounded annually until retirement. She does not expect to be able to save or invest any additional funds between now and retirement. Each dollar that Susan invests today will grow to $1.23 by age 62 or to $1.34 by age 65.

Questions

Assume that Susan places currently available funds in the savings account. Determine the amount of money she will have available at retirement once she sells her house if she retires at (1) age 62 and (2) age 65.
Using the results from item a, determine the level of annual income that will be provided to Susan through purchase of an annuity at (1) age 62 and (2) age 65.
With the results found in the preceding questions, determine the total annual retirement income Susan will have if she retires at (1) age 62 and (2) age 65.
From your findings, do you think Susan will be able to achieve her long-run financial goal by retiring at (1) age 62 or (2) age 65? Explain.
Evaluate Susan’s investment plan in terms of her use of a savings account and an annuity rather than other investments. Comment on the risk and return characteristics of her plan. What recommendations might you offer Susan? Be specific.

