Chapter 17Investing in Mutual Funds

PeopleImages.com- Yuri A/Shutterstock

Layla invested $6,000 in Venz Energy Fund, which pools the money from investors and purchases stocks of companies focused on clean energy. Layla was hoping her investment would increase in value over time and cover much of her college education. Her investment decision was based on the guidance of her stockbroker.

Unfortunately, Layla’s strategy backfired. She noticed shortly after making this investment that her account statement showed a reduction in the value of her investment due to a sales commission expense of $300 that was given to her broker. She also learned that Venz charges a high annual management expense fee to its shareholders, higher than what is charged by most mutual funds.

Over the first year of Layla’s investment, the Venz mutual fund suffered a 13% loss in value. Layla learned that Venz Energy Fund had been purchasing stocks of energy companies that made ambitious claims about their ability to improve the environment without verifying whether such claims were credible or even possible.

Layla felt that she was scammed by her broker, by Venz Energy Fund, and by the companies in which Venz Energy Fund invested. She thought she was making a safe investment that was going to help the environment, but instead she lost a significant portion of the money that was intended to support her college education.

This chapter explains how to invest in stock mutual funds and bond mutual funds to diversify your investment portfolio. An understanding of mutual funds can help you make proper investment decisions and can enhance your wealth.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Provide background on mutual funds.

Identify types of stock and bond mutual funds.

Explain the return-risk trade-off among mutual funds.

Discuss how to choose among mutual funds.

Describe quotations of mutual funds.

Explain how to diversify among mutual funds.

Explain how investing in mutual funds fits into your financial plan.
Background on Mutual Funds
Mutual funds are managed by investment companies such as Charles Schwab, Fidelity Investments, J.P.Morgan, T. Rowe Price, and Vanguard. Many investment companies are subsidiaries of financial conglomerates such as Bank of America, Citigroup, and Wells Fargo, and other financial institutions have investment company subsidiaries that operate mutual funds. Many investment companies operate a family, or group, of separately managed mutual funds. For example, Fidelity, T. Rowe Price, and Vanguard manage several different funds, each of which has its own investment objective.

family
A group of separately managed open-end mutual funds held by one investment company.

Mutual funds can be broadly distinguished according to the securities in which they invest. Stock mutual funds sell shares to individuals and invest the proceeds in stocks. Bond mutual funds sell shares to individuals and invest the proceeds in bonds. Mutual funds employ portfolio managers who decide which securities to purchase. Therefore, individual investors who invest in mutual funds do not have to select securities themselves. More than half of all households in the United States invest in at least one mutual fund. There are about 7,400 mutual funds in the United States. The minimum investment in a mutual fund is usually between $500 and $3,000, depending on the fund, but some mutual funds have no minimum requirement.

stock mutual funds
Funds that sell shares to individuals and invest the proceeds in stocks.

bond mutual funds
Funds that sell shares to individuals and invest the proceeds in bonds.

Mutual funds are popular with investors. In total, U.S. mutual funds have more than $22 trillion in assets. Stock funds account for about 57% of the assets and bond funds account for about 20%.

Motives for Investing in Mutual Funds
One motive for investing in mutual funds is that you can invest in a broadly diversified portfolio with a small initial investment. Your investment, along with investments of other investors, is used by a mutual fund to purchase a portfolio of 100 or more stocks. Thus, even if your investment is only $500, you can be part owner of a diversified portfolio containing more than 100 different stocks by investing in a mutual fund. If you had attempted to buy stocks directly with your $500, you might not have enough money to buy even 100 shares of a single stock.

A second motive for investing in mutual funds is the expertise of the portfolio managers. Your investments reflect the decisions of experienced professionals who have access to the best research available.

A third motive for investing in mutual funds is that they can meet specific investment goals. For example, some mutual funds are designed to satisfy investors who desire potential appreciation in their investments, whereas other mutual funds are designed to provide periodic income (stock dividends or bond coupon payments) to investors.

Net Asset Value
Each mutual fund’s value can be determined by its net asset value (NAV), which represents the market value of the securities that it has purchased minus any liabilities owed. For example, suppose that a mutual fund owns 100 different stocks including 10,000 shares of Nike that are currently worth $110 per share. This mutual fund’s holdings of Nike are worth 
$
1,100,000
 
(
$
110
×
10,000
 shares
)
 as of today. The values of the other 99 stocks owned by the fund are determined in the same manner, and all the values are summed. Then any liabilities such as expenses owed to the mutual fund’s managers are subtracted to determine the NAV.

net asset value (NAV)
The market value of the securities that a mutual fund has purchased minus any liabilities owed.

The NAV is commonly reported on a per-share basis by dividing the NAV by the number of shares in the fund. Each day, the market value of all the mutual fund’s assets is determined. Any interest or dividends earned by the fund are added to the market value of the assets, and any expenses (such as mailing, marketing, and portfolio management) charged to the fund or any dividends distributed to the fund’s shareholders (investors) are deducted. As the value of the mutual fund’s portfolio increases or decreases, so does the fund’s NAV.
Open-End versus Closed-End Funds
Mutual funds are classified as either open-end funds or closed-end funds. The great majority of mutual funds are open-end funds, while there are only about 440 closed-end funds.

Open-End Funds
Open-end mutual funds sell shares directly to investors and repurchase those shares whenever investors wish to sell them. By offering a diverse set of mutual funds, these investment companies satisfy investors with many different investment preferences.

Consider an open-end stock mutual fund that receives $10 million today as new investors purchase shares of the fund. In addition, today some investors who had previously purchased shares decide to sell those shares back to the fund, resulting in $6 million in redemptions. In this example, the stock mutual fund has a net inflow of $4 million of new money that its portfolio managers will invest.

open-end mutual funds
Funds that sell shares directly to investors and repurchase those shares whenever investors wish to sell them.

On some days, the value of redemptions may exceed the value of new shares purchased. Mutual fund managers typically maintain a small portion of the fund’s portfolio in the form of cash or marketable securities so that they have sufficient liquidity when redemptions exceed new share purchases. Otherwise, they can sell some stocks in their portfolio to obtain the necessary money for redemptions.

Closed-End Funds
Closed-end funds issue shares to investors when the funds are first created, but they do not repurchase shares from investors. Unlike an open-end fund, which sells new shares on demand to new investors, shares of a closed-end fund are purchased and sold on stock exchanges. Thus, the closed-end fund does not sell new shares on demand to investors and does not allow investors to redeem shares.

The market price per share of a closed-end fund is determined by the demand for shares versus the supply of shares that are being sold, similar to how stocks are priced in the market. The price per share of a closed-end fund can differ from the fund’s NAV per share. A closed-end fund’s share price may exhibit a premium (above the NAV) in some periods and a discount (below the NAV) in other periods. About 61% of closed-end funds are bond funds, and most of the remainder are stock funds. In total, U.S. closed-end funds have about $254 billion in assets, much less than open-end funds.

closed-end funds
Funds that sell shares to investors but do not repurchase them; instead, fund shares are purchased and sold on stock exchanges.

premium
The amount by which a closed-end fund’s share price in the secondary market is above the fund’s NAV.

discount
The amount by which a closed-end fund’s share price in the secondary market is below the fund’s NAV.

Load versus No-Load Funds
Open-end mutual funds can be either load funds or no-load funds. No-load mutual funds sell directly to investors and do not charge a fee. Conversely, load mutual funds charge a fee (or load) when you purchase them. In most cases, the fee goes to stockbrokers or other financial service advisers who execute transactions for investors in load mutual funds. Because no-load funds do not pay a fee to brokers, brokers are less likely to recommend them to investors.

no-load mutual funds
Funds that sell directly to investors and do not charge a fee.

load mutual funds
Funds whose shares are sold by a stockbroker who charges a fee (or load) for the transaction.

Investors should recognize the impact of loads on their investment performance. In some cases, the difference in loads is the reason one mutual fund outperforms another.
Example
You have $5,000 to invest in a stock mutual fund. You have a choice of investing in a no-load fund by sending your investment directly to the fund or purchasing a mutual fund that has a 4% load and has been recommended by a broker. Each fund has a NAV of $20 per share, and their stock portfolios are very similar. You expect each fund’s NAV to be $22 at the end of the year, which would represent a 10% return from the prevailing NAV of $20 per share (assuming there are no dividends or capital gain distributions over the year). You plan to sell the mutual fund in one year. If the NAVs change as expected, your return for each fund will be as shown in Exhibit 17.1.

Exhibit 17.1 Comparison of Returns from a No-Load Fund and a Load Fund

Figure 17.1 Full Alternative Text
Notice that you would earn a return of 10% on the no-load fund versus 5.6% on the load fund. Although the load fund’s portfolio generated a 10% return, your return is less because of the load fee. Based on this analysis, you decide to purchase shares of the no-load fund.

Studies on mutual funds have found that no-load funds perform at least as well as load funds on average, even when not including the fees paid on a load fund. When they do include the fee paid on load funds, no-load funds have outperformed load funds, on average.

So why do investors invest in load funds? Some investors may purchase load funds without realizing that they are being charged a commission, if their broker did not inform them. To invest in no-load funds, you can apply online.

Expense Ratios
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, mutual funds incur expenses, including administrative, legal, and clerical expenses and portfolio management fees. Some mutual funds have much higher expenses than others. These expenses are incurred by the fund’s shareholders because the fund’s NAV (which is what investors receive when redeeming their shares) accounts for the expenses incurred. Investors should review the annual expenses of any mutual funds in which they invest. In particular, they should focus on the fund’s expense ratio, which measures the annual expenses per share divided by the NAV of the fund. An expense ratio of 1% means that shareholders incur annual expenses amounting to 1% of the value of the fund. The higher the expense ratio, the lower the return for a given level of portfolio performance. Mutual funds that incur more expenses are worthwhile only if they offer a high enough return to offset the extra expenses.

expense ratio
The annual expenses per share divided by the net asset value (NAV) of a mutual fund.

On average, mutual funds have an expense ratio of about 1.25%. In general, funds that invest in stocks of large companies have the lowest expense ratios, while funds that specialize in stocks of small companies or international stocks have the highest expense ratios. The expense ratios of mutual funds can be found on many financial websites.

Reported Components of Expense Ratios
Many mutual funds break their expense ratios into three categories: management, 12b-1 fee, and “other.” The management fee represents the fee charged for managing the mutual fund’s portfolio and is typically the largest component of the expense ratio. It includes the cost of researching various securities and compensating the employees who manage the mutual fund’s portfolio.

The 12b-1 fee is charged by some mutual funds to pay brokers who invest in the mutual fund on behalf of customers. A mutual fund may be called “no-load” but still compensate brokers. Some mutual funds have this arrangement with brokers because it enables them to attract more investors. Therefore, the shareholders who invest in the mutual fund incur a higher expense ratio than if the fund did not charge such a fee. The 12b-1 fee typically ranges from 0.25% to 1% of assets. The third category of the expense ratio (“other” expenses) includes general business expenses such as mailing and customer service.

Relationship between Expense Ratios and Performance
Research has shown that mutual funds with relatively low expenses tend to outperform other funds with similar objectives. This finding suggests that the mutual funds with higher expenses cannot justify them.
Types of Mutual Funds
Investors can select from a wide array of mutual funds, including stock mutual funds and bond mutual funds. Each category includes many types of funds to suit the preferences of individual investors.

Types of Stock Mutual Funds
Open-end stock mutual funds are commonly classified according to their investment objectives. If you consider investing in a stock mutual fund, you must decide on the type of fund in which you wish to invest. Some of the more common investment objectives are described here.

Growth Funds
Growth funds focus on stocks of firms that have the potential for above-average growth.

growth funds
Mutual funds that focus on stocks with the potential for above-average growth.

Capital Appreciation Funds
Capital appreciation funds focus on stocks of firms that are expected to grow at a very high rate. These firms tend to pay low or no dividends so that they can reinvest all of their earnings to expand.

capital appreciation funds
Mutual funds that focus on stocks of firms that are expected to grow at a very high rate.

Small Capitalization (Small-Cap) Funds
Small capitalization (small-cap) funds focus on firms that are relatively small. Small-cap funds and capital appreciation funds overlap somewhat because smaller firms tend to have more potential for growth than larger firms.

small capitalization (small-cap) funds
Mutual funds that focus on relatively small firms.

Midsize Capitalization (Mid-Cap) Funds
Midsize capitalization (mid-cap) funds focus on medium-sized firms. These firms tend to be more established than small-cap firms but may have less growth potential than small-cap firms.

midsize capitalization (mid-cap) funds
Mutual funds that focus on medium-sized firms.

Equity Income Funds
Equity income funds focus on firms that pay a high level of dividends. These firms tend to exhibit less growth because they use a relatively large portion of their earnings to pay dividends rather than reinvesting earnings for expansion. The firms normally have less potential for high returns and exhibit less risk.

equity income funds
Mutual funds that focus on firms that pay a high level of dividends.

Balanced Growth and Income Funds
Balanced growth and income funds contain both growth stocks and stocks that pay high dividends. This type of fund distributes dividends periodically, while offering more potential for an increase in the fund’s value than an equity income fund.

balanced growth and income funds
Mutual funds that contain both growth stocks and stocks that pay high dividends.
Sector Funds
Sector funds focus on stocks in a specific industry or sector. Investors who expect a specific industry to perform well may want to invest in a sector fund. Sector funds enable investors with small amounts of funds to invest in a diversified portfolio of stocks within a particular sector. An example of a sector fund is a technology fund, which focuses on stocks of technology-based firms. Most of these firms are relatively new.

sector funds
Mutual funds that focus on a specific industry or sector, such as technology stocks.

technology funds
Mutual funds that focus on stocks of technology-based firms and therefore are a type of sector fund.

Index Funds
Index funds are mutual funds that attempt to mirror the movements of an existing stock index. Investors who buy shares in an index fund should earn returns similar to what they would receive if they invested in the index. For example, Vanguard offers a mutual fund containing a set of stocks that moves in the same manner as the S&P 500 index. It may not contain every stock in the index, but it is still able to mimic the index’s movement.

index funds
Mutual funds that attempt to mirror the movements of an existing stock index.

Other index funds mimic broader indexes such as the Wilshire 5000 for investors who want an index that represents the entire stock market. In addition, there are small market capitalization index funds that are intended to mirror movements in the small-cap index. Other index funds mimic foreign stock indexes, such as European index and Pacific Basin index funds. Investors who want to invest in a particular country but do not want to incur excessive expenses associated with foreign stock exchanges can invest in an index fund targeted to that country.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
investor.vanguard.com and search for the term “index funds.”

To get
News and other information about index mutual funds that can guide your investment decisions.

Index funds have become very popular because of their performance relative to other mutual funds. They incur lower expenses than a typical mutual fund because they are not actively managed. The index fund does not incur expenses for researching various stocks because it is intended simply to mimic an index. In addition, the fund’s portfolio is not frequently revised. Consequently, index funds incur very low transaction costs, which can enhance performance. Some index funds have expense ratios between 0.20% and 0.30%, which is substantially lower than the expense ratios of most other mutual funds.

In addition to having lower expense ratios, index funds may offer another benefit. Much research has found that the performance of portfolios managed by portfolio managers is frequently lower than the performance of an existing stock index. Thus, investors may be better off investing in an index fund than in an actively managed portfolio. Many investors are choosing index funds.

Note, however, that some index funds have expense ratios that are 1.25% or higher, even though their portfolio management expenses are low. You should ensure that the expense ratio is low before selecting a fund.

Example
You consider investing in either a no-load mutual fund that focuses on growth stocks or an index mutual fund. Not including expenses incurred by the mutual funds, you expect that the growth fund will generate an annual return of 9% versus an annual return of 8% for the index fund. The growth fund has an expense ratio of 1.5% versus an expense ratio of 0.2% for the index fund. Based on your expectations about the portfolio returns, your returns would be as follows:
	Growth Fund	Index Fund
Fund’s portfolio return (before expenses)	9.0%	8.0%
Expense ratio	1.5%	0.2%
Your annual return	7.5%	7.8%
The comparison shows that the index fund can generate a higher return for you than the other fund even if its portfolio return is lower. Based on this analysis, you should invest in the index fund.

International Stock Funds
International stock funds focus on firms that are based outside the United States. Some of these funds focus on firms in a specific country, whereas others focus on a specific region or continent. Funds with a country or regional concentration are attractive to investors who want to invest in a specific country but prefer to rely on an experienced portfolio manager to select the stocks. International stock funds are subject to exchange rate risk. If the currency denominating the foreign stocks weakens against the dollar, the value of the foreign stocks is reduced from a U.S. investor’s perspective, and the international stock fund’s performance is adversely affected.

international stock funds
Mutual funds that invest in stocks of firms that are based outside the United States.

exchange rate risk
Risk realized when the value of a bond drops because the currency denominating the bond weakens against the dollar.

The expenses associated with managing a portfolio are higher for international mutual funds than for other mutual funds because monitoring foreign firms from the United States is expensive. In addition, transaction costs from buying and selling stocks of foreign firms are higher.

Some stock mutual funds invest in stocks of both foreign and U.S. firms. These are called global stock funds to distinguish them from international stock funds.

global stock funds
Stock mutual funds that invest in stocks of firms that are based outside the United States as well as stocks of U.S. firms.

Socially Responsible Stock Funds
Socially responsible stock funds are mutual funds that focus on firms that have high standards of corporate governance and are perceived to be beneficial to society. For example, a socially responsible fund likely would not invest in firms that produce cigarettes, guns, or fossil fuels. It might invest in a solar energy company or one producing electric cars.

socially responsible stock funds
Mutual funds that focus on firms that have high standards of corporate governance and are perceived to be beneficial to society.

Hybrid Funds
In recent years, hybrid funds, which include both stocks and bonds in their portfolios, have become increasingly popular. Many investors like the idea of combining the potential for growth of stocks with the relative stability and income of bonds.

There are several types of hybrid funds. Asset allocation funds (also called balanced funds) have relatively fixed percentages of stocks and bonds in their portfolios. Thus, a fund’s portfolio might generally contain about 60% stocks and 40% bonds, and the fund manager would make small adjustments as market conditions change. Another type of hybrid fund is the lifecycle fund (also called an age-based or target-date fund), which has become a popular choice for retirement accounts.
Types of Bond Mutual Funds
Investors can also select a bond fund that satisfies their investment objectives. The more popular types of bond funds are identified here.

Treasury Bond Funds
Treasury bond funds focus on investments in U.S. Treasury bonds. Recall that these bonds are backed by the federal government, so they are free from default risk.

Treasury bond funds
Mutual funds that focus on investments in U.S. Treasury bonds.

Ginnie Mae Funds
Ginnie Mae funds invest in bonds issued by the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA). These bonds have a low degree of default risk because they are issued by a government agency.

Ginnie Mae funds
Mutual funds that invest in bonds issued by the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA).

Corporate Bond Funds
Corporate bond funds focus on bonds issued by high-quality firms. Thus, they tend to have a low degree of default risk.

corporate bond funds
Mutual funds that focus on bonds issued by high-quality firms that tend to have a low degree of default risk.

High-Yield (Junk) Bond Funds
High-yield (junk) bond funds focus on relatively risky bonds issued by firms that are subject to default risk. These bond funds tend to offer a higher expected return than corporate bond funds, however, because of the high yields offered to compensate for the high default risk.

high-yield (junk) bond funds
Mutual funds that focus on relatively risky bonds issued by firms that are subject to default risk.

Municipal Bond Funds
Municipal bond funds invest in municipal bonds. Recall from Chapter 16 that the interest income on these bonds is exempt from federal taxes. Consequently, municipal bond funds are attractive to investors in high income tax brackets.

municipal bond funds
Mutual funds that invest in municipal bonds.

Index Bond Funds
Index bond funds are intended to mimic the performance of a specified bond index. For example, Vanguard offers several different bond index funds, including the following:

A total bond index fund that tracks an aggregate (broad) bond index

A short-term bond index fund that tracks an index representing bonds with one to five years to maturity

An intermediate bond index fund that tracks an index representing bonds with 5 to 10 years to maturity

A long-term bond fund that tracks an index representing bonds with 15 to 25 years to maturity

index bond funds
Mutual funds that are intended to mimic the performance of a specified bond index.

International Bond Funds
International bond funds focus on bonds issued by non-U.S. firms or governments. Some international bonds are attractive to U.S. investors because they offer a higher yield than is offered on U.S. bonds. International stock funds are subject to exchange rate risk. If the currency denominating the foreign bonds weakens against the dollar, the value of the foreign bonds is reduced from a U.S.
investor’s perspective, and the international bond fund’s performance is adversely affected. Also, expenses incurred by international bond funds tend to be higher than those of domestic bond funds because of costly international transactions.

international bond funds
Mutual funds that focus on bonds issued by non-U.S. firms or governments.

Some bond funds focus on investments within a specific country or region. These funds are attractive to investors who want to invest in a foreign country but do not want to select the bonds themselves. Some bond funds invest in both foreign and U.S. bonds. They are referred to as global bond funds to distinguish them from the international bond funds that concentrate solely on non-U.S. bonds.

global bond funds
Mutual funds that invest in foreign bonds as well as U.S. bonds.

Like other bond funds, international and global bond funds are exposed to interest rate movements. Foreign bond prices are influenced by the interest rate of the currency denominating the bond in the same way that U.S. bond prices are influenced by U.S. interest rate movements. When the interest rate of the currency denominating the bonds increases, bond prices decline. Conversely, when the interest rate of the currency decreases, the prices of bonds denominated in that currency increase.

Maturity Classifications
Each type of bond fund can be segmented further by the range of maturities. For example, some Treasury bond funds are classified as medium term (8 to 12 years) or long term (13 to 30 years). Other bond funds are also segmented in this manner.

Other Types of Mutual Funds
The basic types of stock and bond mutual funds already described can be further subdivided, as new fund types have been created to satisfy the preferences of investors. As an example, some growth stock funds have been designed to focus specifically on small firms, whereas others have been created to focus on large firms. Investors who desire large firms that are expected to grow would consider investing in large-cap growth funds. Investors who desire small firms that are expected to grow would consider investing in small-cap growth funds. Similarly, more specialized bond funds are available such as funds that invest in Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPs), which are Treasury bonds that are adjusted periodically for inflation.

Another type of mutual fund is a fund of funds, which invests in a set of other mutual funds as a way to achieve broad diversification. For example, a fund of funds might invest in several types of stock funds and a variety of bond funds. Although funds of funds do achieve diversification, they tend to have very high expenses. In addition, these funds may not be as diversified as they seem at first glance because some of the same stocks may be included in several funds.

Some investors have been attracted by so-called alternative funds, whose investments and strategies differ considerably from those of standard mutual funds. Alternative funds may purchase nontraditional investments such as foreign currencies, gold, or even rare coins, or they may use aggressive strategies such as short selling. These funds can be very risky, and investors should be aware that they could lose much of their investment.

Exchange-Traded Funds
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are designed to track other assets such as a particular stock index (like index funds), a particular bond index, a commodity, or a basket of assets. Yet, unlike index mutual funds, ETFs are traded on a stock exchange, and their share price changes throughout the day. ETFs are relatively new compared to mutual funds, but they have grown substantially in the last decade. Institutional investors are investing heavily in ETFs, and their activity helps to maintain liquidity for these funds. Total investment in ETFs is presently about $7 trillion. They account for about 30% of the trading (as measured by value) on U.S. stock exchanges. Price quotations for ETFs are available in all of the same places stock price quotations can be found.

exchange-traded funds (ETFs)
Funds that are designed to track other assets such as a particular stock index (like index funds), a particular bond index, a commodity, or a basket of assets; they are traded on a stock exchange just like closed-end funds, and their share price changes throughout the day.

Types of ETFs
More than 2,700 U.S.-based ETFs are available. Many investment companies that manage mutual funds such as Fidelity and Vanguard have also issued ETFs, as investors have shown a preference for these funds. The many types of ETFs include the following:

MARKET ETFS. These are designed to track a particular stock index such as the Standard & Poor’s 500, the Nasdaq 100, or the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The ETF includes all of the stocks in the particular index. Some market ETFs are even broader and include all the stocks on the major U.S. exchanges.

BOND ETFS. These include a selection of one or more types of bonds, such as Treasury, corporate, municipal, government agency, international, or high-yield bonds.
STYLE ETFS. These are designed to include stocks of a particular type of company, such as small-cap growth stocks or large-cap stocks.

SECTOR AND INDUSTRY ETFS. These include stocks of companies in a particular industry such as pharmaceuticals, energy, or consumer staples.

COMMODITY ETFS. These are based on a particular commodity such as oil, gold, or corn.

FOREIGN MARKET ETFS. These are designed to track one or more foreign stock markets such as the Japanese stock market or the German stock market.

FOREIGN CURRENCY ETFS. These track one or more foreign currencies such as the euro or the Japanese yen.

INVERSE ETFS. These are designed to profit from a decline in a particular index or market. They use techniques such as short selling, which is a strategy used when investors consider a stock to be overvalued (Chapter 15).

ALTERNATIVE ETFS. Like alternative mutual funds, these ETFs provide exposure to complicated investment strategies. They tend to be very risky and should be considered only by very sophisticated investors.

ACTIVELY MANAGED ETFS. Although the great majority of ETFs are not actively managed, a few managed funds have been created. They attempt to outperform a particular index.

In addition to exchange-traded funds, exchange-traded notes (ETNs) have also been issued. These are based on debt securities issued by major banks.

Some ETFs are extremely popular. Among the most widely traded ETFs are the S&P 500 Spider (SPDR), which tracks the S&P 500 index; Invesco QQQ, which tracks a selection of Nasdaq stocks and includes many high-tech companies; MSCI Emerging Markets, which is an international ETF; and Vanguard Total Stock Markets, which tracks the performance of the entire U.S. stock market. However, other ETFs do not attract many investors and therefore have limited liquidity. You can obtain information about an ETF by reading its prospectus, which is a document that explains what the fund is designed to do, gives information about its past performance, and discloses its expenses. The prospectus will be available on the website of the issuing company.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Monitoring Exchange-Traded Funds
Application
The Vanguard app (by The Vanguard Group, Inc.) allows you to analyze exchange-traded funds (ETFs).

To Find It
Search for the Vanguard app on your mobile device.

Advantages and Disadvantages of ETFs
ETFs have become so popular because they offer several advantages over mutual funds. Because most ETFs simply track an index or market and are not actively managed, they have lower expense ratios than mutual funds. The average expense ratio for ETFs is around 0.23%, and there are no loads. ETFs are also more tax efficient than mutual funds. An ETF typically pays a quarterly dividend, but unlike mutual funds, ETFs do not make capital gain distributions to their shareholders. If you sell your ETF shares, however, you will pay capital gain tax on any gains. Another advantage of ETFs is that you can buy or sell them at any time throughout the day like stock. In addition, because they trade like stocks, you can use limit orders or stop-buy orders, and buy on margin, which you cannot do with mutual funds. Whereas most mutual funds generally require a minimum initial investment of $500 to $3,000, there is no minimum for investing in ETFs, although you will have to pay a stockbroker’s commission whenever you buy or sell, just as you would with stock.

There are also a few disadvantages to ETFs. Some are so rarely traded. In addition, once you have invested in a mutual fund, the investment company may allow you to invest additional small amounts frequently without charging you a fee each time. If you buy small amounts of an ETF frequently, you will have to pay a broker’s commission each time.

Although the rest of this chapter generally refers only to mutual funds, it applies to ETFs as well except for material related to NAVs or other features specific to mutual funds.
Return and Risk of a Mutual Fund
Before investing in a mutual fund, set your objectives in terms of expected return and the risk (the degree of uncertainty surrounding the expected return) that you can tolerate.

Return from Investing in a Mutual Fund
You can receive a return on your investment in a mutual fund in three different ways: dividend distributions, capital gain distributions, and capital gains from redeeming your shares.

Dividend Distributions
A mutual fund that receives dividend payments must distribute these dividends to its investors in the same year. Mutual funds normally allow their investors to choose whether to receive dividends in the form of cash payments or as additional shares (which means the dividends are reinvested to buy more shares of the fund). Regardless of how dividends are distributed, they are taxed just like dividends received from stocks (at a 15% rate for most taxpayers, although dividends from some foreign companies in international mutual funds may be taxed as ordinary income).

Capital Gain Distributions
A mutual fund that realizes capital gains as a result of selling shares of stocks or bonds must distribute those capital gains to its investors in the same year. As with dividend distributions, mutual funds normally allow investors to choose whether to receive capital gains in the form of cash payments or as additional shares (which means the amount of the capital gains is reinvested to buy more shares of the fund). Distributions of long-term capital gains are taxed at an investor’s long-term capital gains rate, whereas distributions of short-term capital gains are taxed at an investor’s ordinary income tax rate.

Given the differences in tax rates for short-term and long-term gains, investors in high tax brackets will normally achieve better performance by selecting mutual funds that tend to keep their investments for more than one year before selling them, which would generate long-term capital gains rather than short-term capital gains.

Example
You invest in an index fund that has very little turnover and thus produces a small capital gains distribution and a significant amount of dividend income for the year. You also invest in a technology mutual fund that frequently buys and sells technology stocks, producing mostly short-term capital gains, which it distributes to its shareholders. The index fund distributed $200 of long-term capital gains and $800 of dividends, and the tech fund produced no long-term gains and $1,000 of short-term capital gains. Your marginal tax rate on ordinary income is 32% (federal and state), and your long-term capital gains tax rate is 15%.

Your dividends from the index fund are taxed as 
$
800
×
15
%
=
$
120
.
 Your long-term capital gain from the index fund is taxed as 
$
200
×
15
%
=
$
30
.
 Your tech fund generates no dividends or long-term gains, but its short-term gains of $1,000 are taxed as 
$
1,000
×
32
%
=
$
320
.
 The taxes on the two funds are summarized in Exhibit 17.2. Even though the two funds distributed the same amount to you, your taxes on the index fund distributions are $170 lower. Thus, your after-tax income from that fund is $170 higher than your income from the tech fund.

Exhibit 17.2 Potential Tax Implications from Investing in Mutual Funds

Figure 17.2 Full Alternative Text
As the preceding example illustrates, individuals in higher tax brackets can reduce their tax liability by investing in mutual funds with low short-term capital gain distributions.

Capital Gain from Redeeming Shares
You earn a capital gain if you redeem shares of a mutual fund when the share price exceeds the price at which you purchased the shares. For example, if you purchase 200 shares of a stock mutual fund for $25 per share and sell the shares for $30, your capital gain will be as follows:
If you held the shares for more than one year, you have a long-term capital gain. If you held them for one year or less, your gain is subject to your ordinary income tax rate.

Determining your capital gain is more difficult when you have reinvested distributions in the fund, because each distribution results in the purchase of more shares at the prevailing price on that day. The capital gain on the shares purchased at the time of the distribution depends on the price you paid for them. Returns vary among stock mutual funds in any particular period. Although they are normally affected by general stock market conditions, stock mutual funds’ returns can also vary with the specific sector or industry in which the stocks are concentrated.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.lipperleaders.com

To get
Information about mutual funds of various types.

Because the returns are highly dependent on the performance of the sector in which the stock mutual fund is concentrated, be careful when comparing mutual funds. The difference between the performances of two stock mutual funds during a particular period may be attributed to the sector and not to the managers of the funds. Some investors tend to invest in whichever stock mutual fund performed well recently because they presume that the fund has the best portfolio managers. However, if the fund performed well just because its sector performed well, then it would be a mistake to judge the management based on past performance.

Risk from Investing in a Stock Mutual Fund
Although different types of stock mutual funds experience different performance levels in a given time period, they are all influenced by general stock market conditions. The performance of a stock mutual fund depends on general movements in stock prices. When the stock market is weak, prices of stocks held by a stock fund decrease, and the NAV of the fund declines as well. This susceptibility to the stock market is often referred to as market risk. Many stock mutual funds experienced losses of 20% or more during the first few months of 2020 when the COVID-19 pandemic reached the United States.

market risk
The susceptibility of a mutual fund’s performance to general stock market conditions.

Trade-Off between Expected Return and Risk of Stock Funds
ECONOMIC IMPACT

Some investors are willing to tolerate risk from investing in a stock mutual fund when they expect that the mutual fund may offer a very high return. The trade-off between the expected return and risk of different stock mutual funds is shown in Exhibit 17.3. On the conservative side, a stock index fund that represents a very broad index of stocks will achieve similar performance to the market in general. Thus, its expected return is somewhat limited, but so is its risk. A growth stock fund offers the potential for higher returns than a broad index fund, but it also has more risk (more potential for a large decline in value). A fund that invests only in growth stocks within one sector (such as a technology fund) has the potential for a very high return, but it also exhibits high risk. A fund that invests in growth stocks of small firms in a small foreign country has even more potential return and risk.
Exhibit 17.3 Trade-Off between Expected Return and Risk of Stock Funds

Figure 17.3 Full Alternative Text
Risk from Investing in a Bond Mutual Fund
Although different types of bond mutual funds will experience different performance levels in a given time period, they are all influenced by general bond market conditions. The performance of a bond mutual fund depends on the general movements in interest rates. When interest rates rise, prices of bonds held by a bond fund decrease, and the NAV of the fund declines. This susceptibility to interest rate movements is often referred to as interest rate risk.

interest rate risk
The susceptibility of a bond mutual fund to interest rate movements.

The prices of all bonds change in response to interest rate movements, but the prices of longer-term bonds are the most sensitive, as discussed in Chapter 16. Thus, investors who want to reduce exposure to interest rate movements can select a bond fund that focuses on bonds with short terms to maturity. Conversely, investors who want to capitalize on an expected decline in interest rate movements can select a bond fund that focuses on long-term bonds.

The performance of many bond mutual funds also depends on the default risk of the individual bond holdings. Bond funds that invest most of their money in bonds with a high degree of default risk tend to offer a higher potential return to investors, but they also exhibit a high degree of risk. Under favorable economic conditions, the issuers of those bonds may be able to cover their payments, and these bond funds will consequently perform very well. If economic conditions are weak, however, some of the bond issuers may default on their payments, and these bond funds will provide relatively low or even negative returns to their shareholders.

The exposure of a bond fund to default risk is independent of its exposure to interest rate risk, as illustrated in Exhibit 17.4. Some bond funds, such as long-term Treasury bond (T-bond) funds, have no (or a low) default risk and a high level of interest rate risk. Other bond funds, such as short-term high-yield bond funds, have a low level of interest rate risk and a high level of default risk. Some bond funds, such as long-term high-yield bond funds, are highly exposed to both default risk and interest rate risk.

Exhibit 17.4 Classifying Bond Mutual Funds According to Interest Rate Risk and Default Risk

Figure 17.4 Full Alternative Text
Trade-Off between Expected Return and Risk of Bond Funds
The trade-off between the expected return and risk of different bond mutual funds is shown in Exhibit 17.5. On the conservative side, a Treasury bond fund that holds Treasury bonds with a short term remaining until maturity has no exposure to default risk and limited exposure to interest rate risk. Thus, the prices of the bonds it holds are not very sensitive to external forces, so the NAV of the fund will not be very sensitive to these forces. The expected return on this fund is relatively low, however. A high-yield bond fund that invests only in junk bonds with long terms to maturity has the potential for a very high return. Its value is subject to default risk, however, because the junk bonds could default. It is also subject to a high level of interest rate risk because of the long-term maturities. A bond fund that invests in bonds issued by risky firms in a small foreign country has even more potential return and risk.

Exhibit 17.5 Trade-Off between Expected Return and Risk of Bond Mutual Funds

Figure 17.5 Full Alternative Text
Selecting among Mutual Funds
Your decision to purchase shares of a specific mutual fund should be made once you determine your investment objectives, evaluate your risk tolerance, and decide which fund characteristics you desire.

Determine whether you are interested in a stock mutual fund or a bond mutual fund. If you want your investment to have a high potential for increasing in value over time, you should consider capital appreciation funds. If you want periodic income, you should consider bond funds. If you want some income but also some potential for an increase in value, you might consider a hybrid fund.

Reviewing a Mutual Fund’s Prospectus
For any mutual fund that you consider, you should obtain a prospectus, which is a document that provides financial information about the fund, including expenses and past performance. You may be able to download the prospectus from the mutual fund company’s website or you can order it from the mutual fund company over the phone, by e-mail, or online. The prospectus contains considerable information, as described in this section.

prospectus
A document that provides financial information about a mutual fund, including expenses and past performance.

Investment Objective
The investment objective is a brief statement about the general goal of the fund.

investment objective
A brief statement in a prospectus about the general goal of the mutual fund.

Investment Strategy
The investment strategy (also called investment policy) summarizes the types of securities that are purchased by the mutual fund to achieve its objective. For example, a fund’s investment strategy may be to focus on large stocks, technology stocks, stocks that have a high level of growth, foreign stocks, Treasury bonds, corporate bonds, or other securities.

investment strategy
A summary of the types of securities that are purchased by the mutual fund to achieve its objective.

Past Performance
The prospectus will summarize the performance of the fund over recent periods (such as the return over the last year, the last three years, and the last five years). The performance is normally compared to a corresponding stock index (such as the S&P 500) or bond index, which is important because performance should be based on a comparison to general market movements. Although the past performance offers some insight into the ability of the fund’s managers to select stocks, it will not necessarily persist in the future.

Fees and Expenses
The prospectus will provide a breakdown of the following fees and expenses:

The maximum load imposed on purchases of the fund’s shares.

The redemption fee, or back-end load (if any), imposed when investors redeem their shares.

Expenses incurred by the fund, including management fees resulting from monitoring the fund’s portfolio, distribution fees resulting from the fund’s advertising costs, and marketing costs that are paid to brokers who recommend the fund to investors. A fund can be classified as a no-load fund and yet still have substantial advertising and marketing fees.

The most important expense statistic mentioned in the prospectus is the expense ratio. Because it adjusts for the size of the fund, you can compare the efficiency of various mutual funds. The expense ratio may also be converted into the actual expenses that you would be charged if you had invested a specified amount in the fund (such as $1,000). Expense ratios can change over time, so you should monitor them periodically when investing in a mutual fund.

Risk
The prospectus of a stock fund typically states that the fund is subject to market risk or the possibility of a general decline in the stock market, which can cause a decline in the value of the mutual fund. In addition, the prices of individual stocks within the fund may experience substantial declines in response to firm-specific problems. Bond funds normally mention their exposure to interest rate risk and default risk. These risks are stated so that investors understand that there is some uncertainty surrounding the future performance of the mutual fund and that the value of the mutual fund can decline over time.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.fidelity.com
To get
Detailed information about many individual mutual funds that you specify, including past performance and expense ratio. You can also review websites of other investment companies that sell mutual funds.

Distribution of Dividends and Capital Gains
The prospectus explains how frequently the mutual fund makes distributions to investors. Most funds distribute their dividends to their shareholders quarterly and distribute their capital gains once a year (usually in December). The prospectus also describes how dividends and capital gains are distributed.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Managing Your Investments
Application
The Empower Personal Dashboard app (by Personal Capital Corporation) allows you to easily monitor all your mutual fund accounts.

To Find It
Search for the Empower Personal Dashboard app on your mobile device.

Minimum Investment and Minimum Balance
The prospectus states the minimum investment that can be made in the fund. In addition, it may require that you maintain a minimum balance, as it is costly for a fund to maintain an account that has a very small balance.

How to Buy or Redeem Shares
The prospectus explains how you can invest in the fund. If the mutual fund is part of a family of funds operated by a single investment company, the prospectus explains how you can transfer money from one fund to another within the family. The prospectus also explains how you can sell your shares back to the mutual fund.

Choosing the Type of Fund
In choosing a particular type of fund, you will need to consider what type of investment is likely to perform well over the next months or years. One key factor is your expectation of economic conditions in the future. If you expect the economy to weaken, you might consider funds that focus on consumer staples, such as food and beverage companies (people continue to eat cereal and drink sodas during a weak economy); funds that emphasize pharmaceutical and other health care companies (people continue to need health care during a weak economy); funds based on telecommunications companies (people continue to use their mobile phones); or utilities (people continue to heat, cool, and light their homes).

If the economy weakens, consider the types of companies that will do well once the economy starts to recover. In the early stages of a recovery, consumer cyclicals such as entertainment companies, restaurants, and specialty coffeehouses often perform well because people are feeling more confident and are willing to start spending a little more money. Financial companies often perform well during this type of period as people begin to borrow again. Technology companies also tend to perform very well during recoveries. When the full recovery is underway, industrial companies, heavy equipment companies, and homebuilding companies generally perform well.

Other considerations in choosing funds might be based on political or even climatic changes. If a new law expands the number of people who have health insurance and therefore will be using more medical services, you might want to consider funds that emphasize health care and pharmaceutical companies. Changes in the tax laws may affect companies differently, so you might want to choose a fund that focuses on a sector that will benefit from the new law. If you anticipate a very bad hurricane season or other weather-related disasters, you might want to avoid funds that invest heavily in insurance companies. Investment strategies are subject to error, because it is difficult to predict how the economy or specific industries will change. For this reason, many investors simply select a fund that contains diversified investments so that they will benefit (or not lose too much) regardless of economic conditions.

Making the Decision
Once you have narrowed your list to a small number of possible mutual funds, you can create a table to compare the important characteristics. This process will help you select the mutual fund that will best satisfy your preferences.
Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt considers investing in a mutual fund or ETF that focuses on technology stocks. She also wants to avoid a load fee and to ensure that expenses charged by the mutual fund she selects are low. She creates a list of possible mutual funds that focus on technology stocks and require a minimum investment of $1,000. Using a prospectus for each fund that she downloaded online, she assesses the load fee, expense ratio, and past performance, as shown here:

Fund	Load Status	Expense Ratio	Recent Annual Performance
#1	No load	1.5%	8%
#2	No load	0.2%	7%
#3	No load	2.0%	8%
#4	3% load	1.7%	7%
Stephanie immediately eliminates #4 because of its load and high expense ratio. She then removes #1 and #3 from consideration because of their high expense ratios. If she invests in a mutual fund in the near future, she would select #2 (which is an ETF) because it has a relatively low expense ratio. She does not place much weight on past performance in her assessment.

Stephanie also wants to review bond mutual funds that contain AA-rated bonds. She is concerned about interest rate risk because she thinks that interest rates may rise. She creates a list of possible bond funds that allow a very small minimum investment and evaluates information from the prospectuses:

Fund	Load Status	Expense Ratio	Typical Terms to Maturity
#1	4% load	1.0%	Six to eight years
#2	No load	0.9%	Fifteen to twenty years
#3	No load	0.8%	Five to seven years
#4	No load	1.2%	Five to seven years
Stephanie eliminates #1 because it has a load. She eliminates #2 because it focuses on bonds with long terms to maturity, and that type of bond mutual fund would perform poorly if interest rates rise. She removes #4 from consideration because it has a relatively high expense ratio in comparison with #3. If she invests in a bond fund in the near future, she would select #3 because it is a no-load fund, it has a low expense ratio, and its bonds have a relatively short term to maturity, which reduces the amount of interest rate risk. She also prefers bond fund #3 because it is in the same family of mutual funds as the stock mutual fund that she just selected. Thus, she will be able to easily transfer money between these two mutual funds.
Quotations of Mutual Funds
Price quotations for mutual funds can generally be found on financial websites, but often the easiest place to locate the quotation for a particular fund is to go to the website of the investment company that manages it, such as Vanguard or Fidelity. Financial newspapers such as the Wall Street Journal publish abbreviated price quotations for selected open-end mutual funds. The traditional format for mutual fund price quotations is shown in Exhibit 17.6.

Exhibit 17.6 Example of Mutual Fund Price Quotations

Figure 17.6 Full Alternative Text
When an investment company offers several different mutual funds, its name is printed in bold, and the funds are listed below. For example, Blazer Funds (shown in Exhibit 17.6) is the name of an investment company that manages a growth fund and an equity income fund. Each fund’s NAV is shown in the second column, the net change in the NAV is shown in the third column, and the return over the year to date (YTD) is shown in the fourth column. Blazer’s growth fund has a NAV of $32.23 per share. The net change in the NAV during the previous day was $0.15. The fund has generated a return of 8.26% since the new calendar year and a 22.51% return over the last three years.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
investor.vanguard.com

To get
Research on mutual funds and stocks and online tools to help investors.

Price quotations of closed-end funds are also available on financial websites. An example is shown in Exhibit 17.7. Quotations of closed-end funds are listed on the exchanges where they are traded. The listing on financial websites will disclose the dividend of the fund, the last-reported price, and the change in the price per share. The premium or discount of the closed-end fund (relative to the price) may not be reported there, but it can often be found through the website of the Closed-End Fund Association (www.cefa.com) or at the website of the company that manages the fund. Consider the closed-end fund Zumex Fund, which invests in various stocks. It paid an annual dividend of $2.24 per share. Its last price (at the time its shares were last traded) on the previous day was $29.41 per share. This reflects a gain of $0.17 per share over the day.

Exhibit 17.7 Example of a Closed-End Fund Price Quotation

Figure 17.7 Full Alternative Text
In any particular period, some types of mutual funds perform better than others. For example, in some years large stocks perform well, and small stocks perform poorly. In other years, smaller stocks perform better than large stocks. When investors want to assess the performance of a mutual fund, they should compare the return on that mutual fund to the average return for that same type of mutual fund. In this way, investors can determine whether their mutual fund was managed effectively.

Financial newspapers and financial websites commonly provide information about the performance of mutual funds over a recent period, such as the last quarter. The average return can vary substantially among types of mutual funds. In some periods, mutual funds that specialize in a particular type of stock (such as technology stocks or small stocks) perform much better than other mutual funds, primarily because the types of stocks in which they invest performed well. For this reason, many investors commonly switch from one type of mutual fund to another over time, hoping to properly guess the type of stocks that will perform relatively well in any particular period. However, the types of stocks that performed well in the most recent quarter will not necessarily perform well in the next quarter.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance
Performance of Mutual Funds
Application
The Morningstar for Investors app (by Morningstar, Inc.) provides a performance review of mutual funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and index funds.

To Find It
Search for the Morningstar for Investors app on your mobile device.

Various information sources indicate the mean performance level among mutual funds. For example, Lipper indexes indicate the mean return for various types of mutual funds. These indexes are periodically reported on various websites. Investors review the Lipper indexes to compare the performance of different types of mutual funds over time.
Diversification among Mutual Funds
If you plan to invest in more than one mutual fund, you may want to consider diversifying across several types of mutual funds to achieve a lower level of risk. When a stock mutual fund that contains large stocks is performing poorly, another stock mutual fund that contains small stocks may be performing well. Diversification benefits can be limited, though, because when the stock market declines, the values of most stock mutual funds decline as well. Therefore, diversifying among stock mutual funds that invest in U.S. stocks has only limited effectiveness in reducing risk.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.investor.gov

To get
General information provided by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission about investing in mutual funds.

Diversification across bond mutual funds may result in less risk than investing in a bond fund that focuses only on long-term bonds. Virtually all bond funds are adversely affected by an increase in interest rates, however, so diversification among bond funds is not an effective means of reducing exposure to interest rate risk.

A more effective diversification strategy is to diversify across stock and bond mutual funds. The returns of stock mutual funds and bond mutual funds are not highly correlated, so diversifying among stock and bond funds can be effective. When U.S. stock market conditions are poor, stock funds focused on U.S. stocks will perform poorly, but the bond funds may still perform well. If U.S. interest rates rise, the bond funds may perform poorly, but the stock funds may still perform well. Another possibility might be to invest in a hybrid fund that combines stocks and bonds in its portfolio.

International Diversification of Mutual Funds
You may be able to reduce your overall risk further by diversifying among mutual funds that represent different countries. International stock funds tend to be susceptible to the market conditions of the countries (or regions) where the stocks are based and to the exchange rate movements of the currencies denominating those stocks against the dollar. Thus, the returns of international stock funds are less susceptible to U.S. stock market conditions. International bonds are primarily influenced by the interest rates of their respective countries, so they are also less susceptible to U.S. interest rate movements.

Consider a strategy of investing in the portfolio of mutual funds listed in the first column of Exhibit 17.8. The primary factor that affects each mutual fund’s return is shown in the second column. Notice that each fund is primarily affected by a different factor, so one adverse condition (such as a weak U.S. market) will have only a limited adverse effect on your overall portfolio of mutual funds. Any adverse conditions in a single country should affect only a mutual fund focused on that country.

Exhibit 17.8 Variation in the Primary Factor That Affects the Return on Mutual Funds

Figure 17.8 Full Alternative Text
Diversification through Mutual Fund Supermarkets
A mutual fund supermarket enables investors to diversify among various mutual funds (from different mutual fund families) and receive summary statement information for these funds on a consolidated basis. Charles Schwab created the first mutual fund supermarket.

mutual fund supermarket
An arrangement offered by some brokerage firms that enables investors to diversify among various mutual funds (from different mutual fund families) and to receive a consolidated summary statement for these funds.

You can also achieve consolidated summary statements of your mutual funds by selecting all of your funds from a single family. To the extent that you select funds from a fund family that has low expenses and wide offerings (such as Vanguard), you can probably invest in all the types of mutual funds you desire and reduce the expenses that you are indirectly charged.
Other Types of Funds
In addition to mutual funds and closed-end funds, there are other types of funds that pool money from investors and invest it for them. Hedge funds sell shares to wealthy individuals and financial institutions and use the proceeds to invest in securities. They require a much larger initial investment (such as $1 million) than mutual funds. Although many hedge funds have performed well, they typically charge high management fees and are exposed to much risk. They have been subject to minimal regulation, which has allowed some hedge funds to engage in fraudulent activity.

hedge funds
Limited partnerships that manage portfolios of funds for wealthy individuals and financial institutions.

Madoff Fund Scandal
PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance

Bernard Madoff managed a hedge fund that invested money for many institutions, charities, and wealthy individuals. This fund consistently reported very favorable returns for its investors for many years. However, in 2008, Madoff admitted that his financial reporting was a big lie, and it turned out that the actual return on his fund was much worse than he had reported. Consequently, many investors (including charities) who invested money in his fund lost most of the money that they invested. While the scandal occurred many years ago, it will always be remembered because of the severe adverse impact it had on trust in hedge funds. As a result of this scandal, hedge funds have been subjected to more regulatory oversight by the Securities and Exchange Commission.

In retrospect, some of the investors who had invested in Madoff’s fund should have been suspicious that this fund was continually achieving superior performance, even when many other types of investment funds were struggling. The high performance was simply achieved by fraudulent reporting. Perhaps investors were easily convinced that the reporting was accurate because they were receiving the news that they wanted to receive. That is, investors wanted to believe that the reports were true because they were benefitting from the news.
How Mutual Funds Fit into Your Financial Plan
The following are the key decisions about mutual funds that should be included in your financial plan:

Should you consider investing in mutual funds?

What types of mutual funds should you invest in?

Exhibit 17.9 provides an example of how mutual fund decisions apply to Stephanie’s financial plan.

Exhibit 17.9 How Mutual Funds Fit into Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Pla

Figure 17.9 Full Alternative Text
Discussion Questions
How would Stephanie’s mutual fund investing decisions be different if she were a single mother of two children?

How would Stephanie’s mutual fund investing decisions be affected if she were 35 years old? If she were 50 years old?
Summary
BACKGROUND ON MUTUAL FUNDS. Mutual funds can be broadly distinguished according to the securities (stocks or bonds) in which they invest. They allow you to invest in a broadly diversified portfolio with a small initial investment, and investors can rely on managers to manage the fund.

TYPES OF MUTUAL FUNDS. The common types of stock mutual funds include growth funds, capital appreciation funds, income funds, sector funds, and index funds. The income funds typically have a lower expected return than the other funds and a lower level of risk. Capital appreciation funds tend to have a higher potential return than the other funds and a higher level of risk.

The common types of bond mutual funds are Treasury bond funds, Ginnie Mae funds, corporate bond funds, high-yield bond funds, municipal bond funds, index bond funds, and international bond funds. Treasury bond funds with short maturities have low potential return and low risk. High-yield bond funds have higher potential return and high risk (because some of their bonds may default). Any bond funds that invest in long-term bonds are subject to a high level of interest rate risk.

EXCHANGE-TRADED FUNDS. Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are designed to track a particular stock index or market, a set of bonds, a commodity, or a basket of assets. They are traded on a stock exchange, and their share price changes throughout the day. They have become very popular because their expense ratios are generally less than those of mutual funds, and they are more tax efficient.

RETURN-RISK TRADE-OFF IN MUTUAL FUNDS. Mutual funds provide returns to investors in the form of dividend distributions and capital gain distributions. Some mutual funds have the potential to achieve a high return because they invest in stocks with greater growth potential. However, these funds also could experience large losses because the stocks in which they invest commonly experience losses when economic conditions are weak. Other mutual funds that invest in safer stocks tend to have less potential for very high returns, but also less potential for large losses.

CHOOSING AMONG MUTUAL FUNDS. When choosing among stock mutual funds, you should select a fund with a required initial investment that you can afford, an investment objective that satisfies your needs, and a relatively low expense ratio. The prospectus of each fund provides information on these characteristics. When choosing among bond mutual funds, you should select a fund with a required initial investment that you can afford, an investment objective that satisfies your needs, and a relatively low expense ratio.

MUTUAL FUND QUOTATIONS. Mutual fund quotations are provided by many financial websites. These quotations can be used to review the prevailing prices, net asset values (NAVs), expense ratios, and other characteristics. The quotations can also be used to assess recent performance.

DIVERSIFICATION AMONG MUTUAL FUNDS. When diversifying among mutual funds, recognize that most stock funds are affected by general stock market conditions, whereas most bond funds are affected by bond market (interest rate) conditions. You can achieve more effective diversification by investing across stock and bond mutual funds. You may also consider including international stock and bond funds to achieve a greater degree of diversification.

HOW INVESTING IN MUTUAL FUNDS FITS INTO YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Mutual funds allow you to diversify your investments, even if you have only a small amount of money to invest. Thus, they enable you to make investments that offer the potential for high return, while also allowing for diversification to limit your risk. To the extent that mutual funds can help you accumulate wealth to satisfy future spending or retirement goals, they can help you achieve your financial plan.
Review Questions
CATEGORIES OF MUTUAL FUNDS. What are mutual funds? What two broad categories of mutual funds exist and how are they different? Who selects the securities contained within a mutual fund?

INVESTING IN MUTUAL FUNDS. List three motives or advantages for investing in mutual funds.

NAV. What is a mutual fund’s net asset value (NAV)? How is the NAV calculated and reported?

OPEN-END FUNDS. What is an open-end mutual fund? What types of companies usually manage open-end funds? Describe how these funds work on a day-to-day basis.

CLOSED-END FUNDS. What is a closed-end fund? Describe how closed-end funds function.

DISCOUNT OR PREMIUM. What does it mean for a closed-end fund to trade at a discount? What does it mean for a closed-end fund to trade at a premium?

LOAD VERSUS NO-LOAD FUNDS. What is the difference between no-load and load mutual funds? How do loads affect a fund’s return? Why do some investors purchase load funds? How does an investor purchase a no-load fund?

MUTUAL FUND EXPENSES. What kinds of expenses do mutual funds incur? How are expense ratios calculated? Why should investors pay attention to expense ratios?

TYPES OF STOCK MUTUAL FUNDS. List and briefly describe the different types of stock mutual funds.

INDEX FUNDS. Why do investors invest in index funds? Discuss the popularity of index fund investment as it relates to expenses. What tax advantage do index funds offer relative to other types of mutual funds?

TYPES OF BOND MUTUAL FUNDS. List and briefly describe the types of bond mutual funds.

BOND FUND EXPENSES. Why are some U.S. investors attracted to international and global bond funds? What risk is associated with these funds that investors are not subject to when investing strictly in U.S. bond funds? Discuss the expenses associated with international and global bond funds relative to domestic bond funds.

ETFS. What is an ETF? How do ETFs differ from open-end stock funds?

TYPES OF ETFS. List and briefly describe the different types of ETFs.

ETF ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES. List the advantages and disadvantages of ETFs.

HOW MUTUAL FUNDS GENERATE RETURNS. Describe the three ways a mutual fund can generate returns for investors.

STOCK MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE. Is a stock mutual fund’s past performance necessarily an indicator of future performance? What type of risk affects all stock mutual funds? Describe the trade-off between the expected return and risk of stock funds.

BOND MUTUAL FUND RISK. Discuss return and risk as they relate to bond mutual funds. What type of risk are all bond funds subject to? What other risk is associated with some bond funds? Describe the trade-off between risk and the expected return of bond mutual funds.

INVESTING IN MUTUAL FUNDS. When deciding whether to purchase shares of a mutual fund, what characteristics should investors consider? Briefly discuss each characteristic.

MUTUAL FUND PROSPECTUS. What is a prospectus? How does an investor obtain one? What information does a prospectus provide?

CHOOSING A MUTUAL FUND. What are some factors to consider when choosing a mutual fund?

CLOSED-END AND OPEN-END FUND QUOTATIONS. Where can an investor find price quotations for closed-end and open-end funds? What information will be provided in a quotation for open-end funds? What information will be provided in a quotation for closed-end funds?

LIPPER INDEXES. Explain how Lipper indexes are used.

DIVERSIFICATION. Discuss diversification among mutual funds. Describe some strategies that make diversification more effective. What is a mutual fund supermarket?

FUND FAMILY. What is a fund family? What are the benefits of using a fund family?

SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE STOCK FUNDS. What are socially responsible stock funds? What types of stocks would this type of fund typically avoid owning?

HYBRID FUND. What is a hybrid fund? What are some of the advantages of hybrid funds?

LIFECYCLE FUND. What is a lifecycle fund? What are the advantages of this type of mutual fund?

JUNK BOND FUND. What is a junk bond fund? What type of investor might be attracted to junk bond funds?

INTERNATIONAL BOND FUNDS. What are international bond funds? What specific type of risk do these funds have that domestic bond funds do not have?

MUTUAL FUNDS AND YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. What factors do you need to consider when deciding whether to add mutual fund investing to your financial plan?

HEDGE FUNDS. What is a hedge fund? What type of individual invests in a hedge fund?