Chapter 12Health and Disability Insurance

Torwaiphoto/Shutterstock

While out of town, Ruby had terrible abdominal pain, so she went to the nearest hospital and was required to stay the night for tests. One week later, Ruby received a bill of $15,000 from the hospital. Even though she had medical insurance, she would have to pay over $5,000 out of pocket. It could have been worse. Had Ruby not had insurance, the entire $15,000 bill would have been hers to pay.

Health care can be very expensive. The health insurance policy that you select will determine how much of your health care expenses are covered. Proper health insurance decisions can protect your net worth.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Provide background on health insurance.

Compare the types of private health care plans.

Describe the contents of a health insurance contract.

Describe health savings accounts.

Describe government health care plans.

Describe federal regulations in health care.

Describe long-term care insurance.

Explain the benefits of disability insurance.

Explain how health insurance fits within your financial plan.
Background on Health Insurance
Health insurance covers health care expenses incurred by policyholders. It limits your potential liabilities and ensures that you will receive necessary medical care. Many more options are available for health insurance than for auto or homeowner’s insurance. Health insurance is offered by both private insurance companies and the government. Some private insurance companies provide only health insurance, while other companies offer it along with other types of insurance. More than 300 million people in the United States (92% of the population) have health insurance. Of those that are insured, 54% have obtained insurance from private insurance companies through group plans provided by their employers, while another 9% have obtained private insurance individually (non-group). Thus, private insurance covers a total of 63% of the insured. The remaining 37% of the insured are covered by government insurance, either Medicaid (which covers 19% of all insured) or Medicare (which covers 18% of all insured).

health insurance
Insurance offered by private insurance companies or the government that covers health care expenses incurred by policyholders for necessary medical care.

The nation’s largest health care insurers are UnitedHealth Group, Centene, Elevance Health, Humana, HCSC, and CVS Health, which serve many employers with group participation plans. These companies in aggregate provide more than half of private health insurance. Each insurance company contracts with doctors and hospitals on the types of services it will cover and the amount it will pay for each service. Individuals insured by the company are then covered up to the agreed-on dollar amount for each service.

Health care providers employ billing and reimbursement specialists to ensure that they have been paid correctly after submitting a claim for payment. Health care providers are required to comply with complex billing procedures to receive payments for services rendered. Hospitals and physicians’ offices employ medical coders to analyze patient accounts and attach the proper billing codes to the accounts before submitting them for payment. The coding often determines the amount of the payment. Policyholders are responsible for their share of the agreed-upon amount between their insurance company and the medical provider.

The COVID-19 pandemic caused a much greater appreciation for health insurance, and also a concern about maintaining health insurance. During the 2020–2021 period, there were massive layoffs, which made it more difficult to afford health insurance. Furthermore, while many people avoided health care services during this period, many others relied heavily on health care providers for medical examinations or COVID-19-related illnesses. Most types of health care services during the COVID-19 pandemic were covered by health insurance for those people who maintained their insurance. Overall, the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the need for health insurance, as the high expenses of health care can quickly eliminate most of your wealth. Therefore, health insurance is a critical component of your financial planning.

Cost of Health Insurance
Health insurance has received much attention in recent years because it has become very expensive. Each year approximately $4.2 trillion is spent on medical care in the United States, which represents more than $10,000 per resident. The cost of medical care is rising for several reasons. One reason is that the average age of the population is increasing. Because older individuals require more health care, the cost of providing health care is rising. People are living longer, partly due to effective health care; therefore, they require medical attention for a longer period of time.

Another reason that health care is becoming more expensive is the large cost of research and development of new drugs and medical procedures. Recent examples include advances in genetic testing, new cardiovascular drugs that are more effective and safer, and precision oncology, which is developing patient-specific cancer treatments. As the cost of health care rises, the cost of health insurance also rises.

Although health insurance is expensive, it is necessary because without it you could face medical bills that could force you into bankruptcy. Thus, if at all possible, your health insurance decision is not whether to obtain it, but which health care plan to purchase and how much coverage to purchase. By understanding your health insurance options, in most cases you can select health insurance that is within your budget and offers adequate protection.
Private Health Insurance
Private health insurance refers to health insurance that can be purchased from private insurance companies to provide coverage for health care expenses. If you need to obtain private health insurance, you have different options regardless of whether you purchase health insurance individually or within an employer-sponsored group. Your private health insurance coverage options are either a managed care plan or a fee-for-service plan (sometimes known as an indemnity plan). Managed health care plans require individuals to receive health care services from specific doctors or hospitals that are part of the plan or network. You are billed only for services not covered by your insurance. There are two types of managed health care plans, health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and preferred provider organizations (PPOs). These two types of managed care plans are discussed in turn, followed by the fee-for-service plans.

private health insurance
Health insurance that can be purchased from private insurance companies to provide coverage for health care expenses.

managed health care plan
A health insurance policy under which individuals receive services from specific doctors or hospitals that are part of the plan.

Health Maintenance Organizations
A health maintenance organization (HMO) is an arrangement by which a set of health care providers serve a set of member patients based on prearranged health insurance premiums, and patients visit a primary care physician first for referrals to other physician specialists. The HMO establishes an agreement with select health care providers (such as doctors and hospitals) that are obligated to provide services to the HMO members. The health care providers involved in the agreement are paid a predetermined amount of compensation per month. An HMO covers common health care costs, including physician office visits, inpatient hospital stays, outpatient surgery, emergency room visits, and other outpatient services such as physical therapy or lab work.

health maintenance organization (HMO)
An arrangement by which a set of health care providers serve a set of member patients based on prearranged health insurance premiums, and patients visit a primary care physician first for referrals to other physician specialists.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.insure.com/health-insurance/

To get
More details about the type of health insurance coverage that would be ideal for you.

Major Role of Primary Care Physician
Patients participating in an HMO can choose from a list of physicians who participate in their network and would serve as their “primary care physician.” The primary care physician not only is available to provide general health examinations but also is responsible for referring patients to various specialist physicians within the network. Thus, the primary care physician plays a major role in directing patients to various physician specialists.

In many situations, the primary care physician may conclude from an examination that the patient is in good health and does not need to consult a particular type of physician specialist. In other cases, the primary care physician may detect that a patient has, for example, a skin disorder or an irregular heartbeat, and so may refer the patient to a dermatologist, a specialist in skin disorders, or a cardiologist, a specialist in heart-related problems. Once that referral is executed, those patients are allowed to set up an appointment with any dermatologist or cardiologist who is within that specific HMO network.

The requirement that patients consult a primary care physician first in order to get a referral is to prevent the potential inefficiencies that could occur if patients decided which physician specialist they should go to without any guidance. There might be some patients who believe they are having cardiac issues and visit a cardiologist only to find out that they have the flu. Such appointments with a specialist can be avoided if the patient is required to consult a primary care physician before going to a specialist.

Advantages of HMOs
Because HMOs emphasize the early detection and treatment of illnesses, they can limit their expenses and therefore can keep the premiums low. Health insurance premiums for patients who participate in an HMO are relatively low compared to alternative options for private insurance plans. Individuals also typically pay a small fee called a co-pay (such as $20) for a visit to a physician who participates in an HMO or for a prescription. An HMO usually does not have a deductible and also typically covers a portion of prescription expenses as long as patients use pharmacies that participate in the HMO network. Patients do not have to file a claim with the HMO because the health insurance companies pay the health care providers directly.

Disadvantages of HMOs
A disadvantage of HMOs is that individuals must choose among the primary care physicians and specialists who participate in the plan. Thus, they cannot select a physician who is not participating in the HMO. Furthermore, some patients would prefer the flexibility to consult a particular physician specialist without first obtaining a referral from a primary care physician. For example, some patients who notice that they have a skin disorder would prefer to make an appointment with a dermatologist in the network immediately, rather than having to first make an appointment with a primary care physician to be referred to a dermatologist. The requirement to visit the primary care physician first could delay the ultimate treatment of the skin disorder.

Preferred Provider Organizations
A preferred provider organization (PPO) is an arrangement by which a set of health care providers serves a set of member patients but without the requirement to first go to a primary care physician. Thus, you can set up an appointment with a specialist without first visiting a primary care physician. Like an HMO, a PPO covers common health care costs, including physician office visits, inpatient hospital stays, outpatient surgery, emergency room visits, and other outpatient services such as physical therapy or lab work. It includes some primary care physicians available for patients who just need general health services such as an annual health checkup, but it also has more specialist physicians available than an HMO. The premiums and fees for health care services are higher in a PPO than in an HMO.

preferred provider organization (PPO)
An arrangement by which a set of health care providers serve a set of member patients, but without the requirement to first go to a primary care physician.

Flexibility of PPOs
Patients are still given a list of in-network providers, but in a PPO, they also have the flexibility to consult providers outside the PPO network. They will likely incur higher out-of-pocket costs if they choose a provider that is out of the PPO network. They may also have to pay the provider that is out-of-network for the health care service and then file a claim to receive reimbursement from the insurance company. PPOs allow patients more flexibility in filling prescriptions, but the cost to the patients may be higher if the pharmacies are outside of the PPO network.

Out-of-Pocket Expenses of PPOs
A patient’s out-of-pocket expenses for health care are typically higher when participating in a PPO than when participating in an HMO. A PPO commonly has a coinsurance provision in which the insurance company pays a percentage of the bill, and the patient pays a part of the bill. Consequently, individuals may be charged 20% of the bill for specific health care services provided by a PPO versus a small flat co-pay such as $20 for the same services provided by an HMO. They may have a deductible with a PPO, so they may incur the costs of health care services until they meet the deductible limit. In addition, they might still need to make payments for some health care services even if they have met their deductible limit.

A common payment arrangement between health care providers and PPOs is the discount on charge arrangement, in which the PPO agrees to pay a specific percentage of the provider’s charges. For example, if the agreement between the PPO and the provider is a 30% discount on charges and the provider charged $1,000, the PPO would pay a total of $700 (70% of $1,000, representing a discount of 30%). Under this arrangement, the provider receives $300 less than what it normally charges for this type of service. A portion of the $700 payment to the provider would be made by the patient, and the rest of the payment would be made by the PPO. The specific breakdown of the payments is dictated by the contract between the PPO and the patient.

discount on charge arrangement
An arrangement in which the preferred provider organization (PPO) pays a specific percentage of the health care provider’s charges.

A second type of arrangement between the PPO and the health care provider is the per diem rate arrangement, in which the provider is paid a specific amount for each day the patient is hospitalized. If the PPO arrangement is a $650 per diem rate and the hospital charges $1,000 for a one-day stay in the hospital, the total amount owed to the hospital would be $650. The payment by the patient to the hospital is determined by the contract between the patient and the PPO.

per diem rate arrangement
An arrangement in which the preferred provider organization (PPO) pays the provider a specific sum for each day a patient is hospitalized.

Patients receive an Explanation of Benefits (EOB) form from the PPO after receiving health care services. The EOB lists the total charges, the total amount that is owed to the provider, and the amount owed by the patient. You should always make sure that the amount you are billed by the provider agrees with the amount shown as your responsibility on your EOB.

Fee-for-Service (Indemnity) Plans
A fee-for-service plan (also known as an indemnity plan) allows individuals the flexibility to seek health care from a primary care physician or a specialist. In addition, they are not restricted to a particular network of health care providers. They are reimbursed for part or all of the health care expenses they incur from health care providers (such as doctors or hospitals) based on the specific provisions of their health insurance contract. Many fee-for-service plans have a coinsurance provision in which the insurance company pays a percentage of the bill. For example, a provision may specify that the insurance company pays 80% of the bill and that you pay the remaining 20%. After you reach the policy’s out-of-pocket limit, the insurance company pays 100% of covered medical expenses.

fee-for-service plan (also known as an indemnity plan)
Health insurance that reimburses individuals for part or all of the expenses they incur from health care providers; individuals are free to decide whether to seek care from a primary care physician or a specialist and are not restricted to physicians within a particular network.

The advantage of a fee-for-service plan is that you can choose your health care provider, without any restrictions. While these plans offer more flexibility than HMOs or PPOs, they also charge higher premiums. Normally, there is an annual deductible that is applied. You are responsible for paying medical bills up to that deductible level, and then the majority of the medical bills after that level will be reimbursed by the insurance plan.

Comparison of Private Health Insurance Plans
A comparison of private health insurance plans is provided in Exhibit 12.1. This exhibit illustrates the trade-off between the flexibility that individuals have in selecting their physician and the premium that they are charged for health insurance.

Exhibit 12.1 Comparison of Private Health Insurance Plans

Figure 12.1 Full Alternative Text
HMOs and PPOs offer brochures that provide the comparative information you need to review before you decide which plan to select. Exhibit 12.2 lists the questions that you should ask before you make your selection. If these questions are not answered in the brochure, contact a representative who can provide the answers.
Exhibit 12.2 Questions to Ask When Considering a Particular HMO or PPO

Figure 12.2 Full Alternative Text
Individual versus Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance
You can purchase health insurance directly from private health insurance companies or through your employer (if you work for an employer).

Obtaining Individual Health Insurance Plans
For individual health plans, you can obtain insurance quotes and go through the application process online. Some websites provide general quotes on the premiums charged by various insurance companies for health care. The quotes may also include information on the deductible, the coinsurance rate, and the fee you would pay for a visit to a doctor. If you want to obtain more information about any specific quote, the website provides a link to the insurance company providing that quote. When you apply online, the initial quote of the premium may be changed after you provide information such as your medical history and present health condition.

The Advantage of Group Health Insurance Plans
Employers that have at least 50 full-time employees must offer their employees the opportunity to participate in a health insurance plan as part of their benefits package. The employer and employee typically share the cost of the health insurance. The employees’ portion of the premium is deducted from their pay, and the employer pays the remainder. Some universities allow their students to participate in a group health insurance plan.

Your health insurance premium will be substantially lower if you can access insurance through a group plan versus if you pursue insurance individually (non-group). The average annual insurance premium for a single person is estimated to be about $7,500 for an individual health insurance policy versus $1,400 for a group plan policy. Furthermore, the average annual insurance premium for a family is estimated to be about $21,000 for an individual health insurance policy versus $5,000 for a group plan policy.

The large difference between the group versus non-group health insurance premiums occurs for two reasons. First, a business can negotiate better health insurance benefits with an insurer when representing a large group of its employees to be insured by that health insurance company. Second, the business tends to cover a portion of the insurance premiums that are charged by the health insurance company. Many businesses pay a large proportion of the health insurance premium for their employees. For example, if a health insurance company charges a premium of $6,000 per single employee but the business pays 70% of the premium, then the employee only pays 30% of the annual premium, or $1,800 (computed as 
30
%
×
$
6,000
).

The potential savings to an employee who accesses the family health insurance through the group plan might be especially large. For example, if a health insurance company charges a premium of $15,000 per employee for family health insurance but the business pays 70% of the charge, then the employee only pays 30% of the annual premium, or $4,500 (computed as 
30
%
×
$
15,000
). For this reason, a company’s group health insurance plan should be given close attention by prospective employees. Saving several thousand dollars a year is like earning extra income, except that the savings do not count as income and therefore are not taxed. Employers tend to obtain all their health insurance from one company. 
Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

When Stephanie Spratt started working for her present employer, she was offered the opportunity to participate in an HMO, a PPO, or a fee-for-service plan that would allow her to go to whatever health care provider she preferred. She periodically reviews her health insurance options and uses various websites to compare premiums for each type of health plan that is available. Regardless of the specific plan she chooses, she noticed that the premium from her employer-sponsored group plan is significantly lower than it would be if she purchased insurance individually.

While the fee-for-service plan offers more flexibility in her choice of physician specialists, its premium is $100 higher per month than her HMO. She also has the opportunity to switch to a PPO, but the premium would be $75 per month higher than her HMO. An advantage of the PPO over her HMO is that there are more physicians available in each health care specialization. At this time, Stephanie does not need any specialists, and she also thinks that her options for a physician specialist within her HMO are sufficient if she ever needs them. She decides that she will continue to participate in the HMO because she does not think that the advantages of the fee-for-service plan or the PPO are worth the extra premium.
Contents of a Health Insurance Contract
Your health insurance contract specifies the premium that you must pay for your health insurance and the obligations of the health insurance company that is providing the insurance. This contract contains the following information.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.webmd.com/health-insurance/hmo-vs-ppo

To get
More information about the advantages and disadvantages of PPOs and HMOs.

Identification of Insured Persons
A health insurance contract identifies who is covered, such as an individual or a family.

Location
Some U.S. insurance companies provide coverage for health care in the United States only, while others provide coverage in other countries, too. Typically, full health insurance benefits are confined to the local area of the beneficiary. Benefits are reduced or eliminated for nonemergency health care received out of the area.

Cancellation and Renewability Options
Your health insurance contract should specify if the insurance company can cancel the contract at any time, or if it guarantees continuous coverage as long as the policyholders pay the premiums on time. In addition, it should specify if you are given the option to renew your contract up to a specified age level.

Main Responsibilities of Patients
Your health insurance contract should specify the various options you have when pursuing health care in order to be covered by the health insurance company. For example, a contract with an HMO plan would include a list of the primary care physicians in the network that you could select and would also identify the physician specialists in the network that are available if your primary care physician approves of your need to pursue a particular type of physician specialist. A contract with a PPO would also identify the physicians in the network that are available and would explain how the cost of a particular health care procedure changes if you select a physician specialist who is outside of the network.

Your health insurance contract should also specify the criteria used to determine how much you must pay for any particular health care service. The most important criteria are the deductible, coinsurance, stop-loss provision, coverage limits, and coordination of benefits, as explained next.

Deductible
A deductible requires that the insured bear the cost of the health care up to a level that is specified in the policy. If a contract specifies a deductible of $500 for specific health care and the bill is $475, you will have to pay the entire amount. If the bill is $900, you will pay the first $500, and the contract will cover the remaining $400. The deductible in health care is similar to the deductible in auto insurance in that it reduces the potential liability to the insurance company. Therefore, the premiums charged for a particular contract are generally lower when the deductible is higher.

Coinsurance
A coinsurance (co-pay) clause specifies the proportion of health care expenses that will be paid by the patient. For example, if your health insurance contract specifies a 20% co-pay, that implies that for a $1,000 bill, you will pay $200 (20% of $1,000). Your specific co-pay can vary among the possible health care services that might be provided.

Stop-Loss Provision
A stop-loss provision sets the maximum amount that you must pay for one or more health care services.

Coverage Limits
Limits can still be placed on spending for health care services that are not considered essential. Therefore, read your contract carefully to determine whether it contains any coverage limits.

Coordination of Benefits
When a health insurance contract has a coordination of benefits provision, it means that the benefits are dependent on what benefits would be paid by other policies that you have. The benefits that would be paid by multiple policies could overlap, but this provision limits the total reimbursement to no more than your expenses. This provision can be beneficial to you because your insurance premiums and coinsurance will be lower if the insurance benefits are coordinated among policies to limit the reimbursement amount.

Other Coverage
Beyond the main components in a health insurance contract already discussed, your contract may also describe additional forms of health insurance coverage.

Rehabilitation
Some health insurance contracts may provide coverage for rehabilitation, including physical therapy sessions and counseling. Many policies set an upper limit on the number of visits for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy. When a physician determines that a policyholder who has had therapy for an injury is healed, or when the policyholder has had the number of sessions allowed under the contract, the insurance company will not pay for any further rehabilitative services.

Mental Health
If an insurance company covers treatment for mental health and substance abuse, that coverage must be at least equal to the coverage provided for medical and surgical treatment. Thus, the company cannot require higher deductibles, co-pays, and coinsurance or set lower limits for mental health coverage than it does for other coverage.

Pregnancy
Most health insurance contracts cover the costs of pregnancy, including prenatal care, hospitalization, and physician fees.

Dental Insurance
A health insurance contract may provide dental insurance, which covers part or all of the fees imposed for dental services, including annual checkups, orthodontics, and oral surgery.

dental insurance
Insurance that covers part or all of the fees imposed for dental services, including annual checkups, orthodontics, and oral surgery.

Vision Insurance
Some health insurance contracts provide vision insurance, which covers part or all of the fees imposed for optician, ophthalmologist, and optometrist services, including annual checkups, glasses, contact lenses, and surgery.

vision insurance
Insurance that covers part or all of the fees imposed for optician and optometrist services, including annual checkups, glasses, contact lenses, and surgery.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Your Health Insurance
Application
The Florida Blue app (by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Florida) provides information for policyholders such as deductible, a summary of claims, and the doctors who are participating in the plan. It also compares drug prices and identifies the pharmacy closest to a desired location. Blue Cross and Blue Shield offer similar apps to individuals in other states.

To Find It
Search for the Florida Blue app on your mobile device. 
Savings Accounts to Pay for Uninsured Health Expenses
Regardless of your health insurance plan, you may incur some health care expenses that are not covered by your health insurance. Two types of health savings accounts offer you tax benefits to encourage savings that will be used to cover your future health care expenses.

Health Care Flexible Spending Accounts (HCFSAs)
A health care flexible spending account (HCFSA) is an account established by an employer for employees to use pre-tax income to pay for medical expenses. The amount that you set aside each pay period for your flexible spending account is not subject to federal, state, or local income taxes, or FICA taxes. In 2023, you could contribute $3,050 to a flexible spending account. If you have unreimbursed medical or dental expenses, you can draw from this account to pay these expenses. By using this account, you are not taxed on the income that you used to pay these health care expenses. A maximum of $610 of unused funds may be rolled over to the next year; otherwise, any funds that are not used at the end of the year are lost.

health care flexible spending account (HCFSA)
An account established by the employer for the employee to use pre-tax income to pay for medical expenses.

Health Savings Accounts (HSAs)
People who do not have access to a HCFSA can cover health care expenses not covered by insurance by setting up a Health Savings Account (HSA). This is a savings account that allows you to set aside pre-tax income to pay for unreimbursed medical expenses such as deductibles and co-payments (but usually not premiums). Any interest earned on the money in the plan is not taxed, and no tax is paid when you withdraw funds from the plan if you use the money for medical expenses. In 2023, an individual could contribute $3,850 to an HSA, and a family could contribute $7,750. All funds in an HSA can be rolled over to the next year. An HSA can be used only if you have a high-deductible health plan. Thus, an HSA can help you reduce health insurance costs because a high-deductible health plan will have lower premiums than a plan with a low deductible.

Health Savings Account (HSA)
An account that shelters income from taxes and can be used to pay your health care expenses if you have a high-deductible health insurance plan.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.healthcare.gov and search for “Health Savings Account.”

To get
More details about health savings accounts.
Government Health Care Plans
The government-sponsored health care plans are Medicare and Medicaid.

Medicare
The Medicare program provides health insurance to individuals who are 65 years of age or older and qualify for Social Security benefits, or who are disabled. Medicare also provides payments to health care providers in the case of illness. Medicare is composed of various parts. Part A consists of hospital insurance and is used to cover expenses associated with inpatient care (including surgeries) in hospitals or nursing facilities and a limited amount of home health care. There is no additional premium required for Part A coverage for individuals who qualify because they (or their spouse) paid sufficient Medicare taxes while working.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.medicare.gov

To get
An overview of services offered by Medicare, including the specific benefits that are available.

Part B represents optional medical insurance and covers some expenses that are not covered by Part A, such as outpatient hospital care, physical therapy, and some home health services. You must pay a monthly premium to receive Part B coverage. If you are receiving Social Security benefits, the premium will be deducted from your benefits.

Part C of Medicare represents a combination of Parts A and B, provided through private insurance companies that are approved by Medicare. In many cases, the Part C plans identify specific doctors or hospitals that you must use.

Part D provides coverage for prescription drugs. The Part D component can vary among insurance plans in terms of the specific drugs that are covered, the amount of coverage per type of drug, and the deductible. You must have Parts A and B of Medicare to qualify for Part D.

Medigap Insurance
Some individuals want supplemental insurance that offers more coverage than Medicare provides. Medigap insurance, also called Medicare Supplement Insurance, is provided by private insurance companies to cover medical expenses that are not covered by Medicare. There are various types of Medigap policies. In most states, there are 11 standardized policies, which are classified as Medigap plans. These policies vary in terms of the premium that you pay and the benefits that you receive.

medigap insurance
Insurance provided by private insurance companies to cover medical expenses that are not covered by Medicare.

Medicaid
The Medicaid program provides health insurance for individuals with low incomes and those in need of public assistance. It is intended to provide health care to older adults, people who are blind, and people with disabilities, as well as families with lower incomes and dependent children. To qualify, individuals must meet some federal guidelines, but the program is administered on a state-by-state basis. Individuals who qualify for Medicare may also be eligible for Medicaid if they need public assistance; in this case, they will receive more health benefits.

Medicaid
A federal program that provides health care to older adults, blind people, and people with disabilities, as well as families with lower incomes and dependent children.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.medigap.com

To get
Information on Medigap plans that are available.
Health Care Insurance Regulations
Federal laws and regulations ensure that individuals can maintain continuous health care coverage, despite their employment status. In particular, the following acts have played a major role.

Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA)
As a result of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1986, you can continue your health insurance provided through an employer’s plan for 18 months after you stop working for the employer. The act applies to private firms and state government agencies, but not to federal government agencies. If you retire, COBRA allows you to continue your health insurance (within the 18-month maximum period) up to the point at which you qualify for government health care. However, you will usually be responsible for the full cost of coverage because your previous employer no longer covers a portion of the premium that you owe. The employer is not required to pay any portion of the premium for former employees under COBRA. Nevertheless, continuing coverage under your former employer’s plan may be cheaper than purchasing health insurance by yourself.

Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 prohibits insurance companies from denying health insurance coverage based on an applicant’s health status, medical condition or history, previous health insurance claims, or disability. The act is especially important for workers who have preexisting medical conditions. For example, consider a woman employed by a firm in Kansas who has an existing medical condition. She wants to move to Dallas and is searching for work with a new employer there. As a result of HIPAA, she cannot be denied health insurance because of her preexisting medical problem as long as she satisfies certain conditions.

For HIPAA to apply, the person must have had health insurance for 12 months with no lapse in coverage of 63 days or more. Thus, a person who leaves a job or is laid off and does not find another job for a long period probably would not be protected under HIPAA. The requirements can be complex, so if you think HIPAA might apply to you, check on the specific provisions. In addition, if the new employer’s plan does not cover certain medical conditions for anyone, it does not have to cover the person’s preexisting condition even though the previous employer’s plan did cover that condition.

HIPAA also established a set of national standards for the protection of health information. The use of computers and automation has resulted in more health insurance fraud and threatens the privacy of information about health care recipients. Therefore, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services issued the Privacy Rule as part of HIPAA to protect this information. The Privacy Rule applies to health plans, health care clearinghouses, and any health care provider who transmits health information in electronic format. This information is referred to as “protected health information (PHI).” PHI includes any past, present, or future physical or mental health condition, the provision of health care to the individual, and any payment for the provision of health care. The purpose of the Privacy Rule is to define and limit the instances in which an individual’s protected health information may be used or disclosed to others.

Affordable Care Act
The Affordable Care Act (ACA), also referred to as Obamacare, is formally known as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. It was passed in 2010, but most of its provisions did not go into effect until 2014. The law had three main goals:

Make affordable health insurance available to more people. To that end, the ACA provides consumers with subsidies that lower the cost of health insurance for households with incomes up to four times the federal poverty level.

Expand the Medicaid program to cover all adults with incomes that are substantially below the federal poverty level.

Support innovative medical care delivery systems designed to lower the costs of health care.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.hhs.gov and search for “Affordable Care Act.”

To get
Detailed information about the Affordable Care Act.

The government has established an online Marketplace at https://healthcare.gov, where people can go to obtain health insurance. Anyone who does not have employer-provided health insurance can obtain insurance through the Marketplace. You do not have to have a low income. A number of states have set up websites, but the federal Marketplace and the state websites operate approximately the same way. After you enter some personal information such as your age and income, you will learn about the subsidy you may qualify for and will find information about health insurance plans that are offered by private insurance companies. All plans offered on the Marketplace or the state websites must provide 10 essential health benefits:

Outpatient care

Emergency services

Hospitalization, including surgery and overnight stays

Pregnancy, maternity, and newborn care

Mental health and substance abuse services

Prescription drugs

Rehabilitative services

Laboratory services

Preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management
Pediatric services including dental and vision care (adult dental and vision care is not required, but some plans may offer these benefits)

Some policies may provide additional benefits. Like other health insurance policies, policies obtained through the Marketplace or state websites have deductibles and co-payments.

The ACA covers many other health care issues. It allows people covered by Medicare Part B and some other plans to receive preventive medical services such as annual health exams, mammograms, and screenings for high cholesterol, diabetes, and some types of cancer at no cost. The law allows people with Medicare Part D to receive substantial discounts on drugs. The law also allows young adults who cannot participate in an employer’s health insurance plan to continue on a parent’s health insurance until age 26. You can obtain information about subsidies available under the ACA and find out how to apply for insurance at the government’s Marketplace at www.healthcare.gov.

Health care providers must meet specific standards before they can bill insurance companies for the services provided. These standards are intended to prevent health insurance fraud, which has become a serious problem. Companies have engaged in fraud by providing unnecessary health care services to receive reimbursement and by requesting reimbursement for services that they never provided.
ong-Term Care Insurance
Many older adults and people who have long-term illnesses need some assistance with everyday tasks such as eating or dressing. Some need around-the-clock medical assistance. According to a recent study, more than 50% of individuals in the United States aged 65 and older will need some kind of long-term care services ranging from home health care to a nursing home. Long-term care can be very expensive.

Government health care plans offer little assistance. Medicare does not cover the costs of long-term care. Although Medicaid might cover some of these expenses for qualifying individuals, its coverage is limited to persons with low incomes.

Long-term care insurance covers expenses associated with long-term health conditions that cause individuals to need help with everyday tasks. It is provided by many private insurance companies, and it typically covers care in a nursing home, assisted living facility, or at home. However, given the high expenses associated with long-term care, the premiums for long-term care insurance are very high. Premiums exceed $3,000 per year for people who purchase long-term care insurance at the age of 60, and they exceed $4,000 per year for people who purchase long-term care insurance at the age of 65.

long-term care insurance
Insurance that covers expenses associated with long-term health conditions that cause individuals to need help with everyday tasks.

Long-Term Care Insurance Provisions
Like other insurance policies, you can design a long-term care contract that fits your needs. Some of the more common provisions are listed here.

Eligibility to Receive Benefits
Policies include the range of benefits for which policyholders can file claims. For example, a contract may specify that long-term care be restricted to medical health care services, while a more flexible contract may also allow for other care such as feeding or dressing.

Types of Services
Long-term care insurance policies specify the types of medical care services that are covered. A contract that covers nursing home care or assisted living will have higher premiums than a contract that covers nursing home care only. For individuals who prefer a more flexible long-term care contract that covers the cost of home health aides, premiums will be higher.

Amount of Coverage
Policies also specify the maximum amount of coverage provided per day. If you want the maximum amount of coverage that a company will provide, you will pay a high premium. If you are willing to accept a lower maximum amount of daily coverage, your premium can be reduced. A contract with less coverage may not completely cover the daily costs that you could incur. In that case, you would need to cover a portion of your expenses.

A contract can contain a coinsurance provision that requires the policyholder to bear a portion of the health care expense. For example, a policyholder can select a contract in which the insurance company pays 80% of the health care expenses specified in the contract, while the policyholder pays the remaining 20%. Because the potential expense to the insurance company is lower as a result of the coinsurance provision, the premium will be lower.

Elimination Period to Receive Benefits
A contract may specify an elimination (or waiting) period before policyholders are eligible to have their long-term care costs covered. An elimination period of between 60 and 90 days is common. The policyholder is responsible for covering expenses until the elimination period is completed. If health care is needed over a period that is shorter than the elimination period, it will not be covered by long-term care insurance.

Maximum Period to Receive Benefits
You can choose to receive insurance benefits for the entire period in which you need long-term care, even if the period is 30 years or longer. If you choose to receive insurance benefits for a limited period, you will be charged a lower premium. For example, your long-term care could be covered for up to three years.

Continued Coverage
A contract may contain a provision that allows you to stop paying premiums once you need long-term care. Some alternative provisions may also allow a limited amount of coverage for a specified number of years, without having to pay any more premiums. In general, any provision that provides additional benefits in the future will require higher premiums today.

Inflation Adjustment
Some policies allow for the coverage to increase in line with inflation over time. Thus, the maximum benefits will rise each year with the increase in an inflation index. You will pay a higher premium for a long-term health care contract that contains this provision.

Stop-Loss Provision
Insurance covering a long-term illness may also specify a stop-loss provision, which sets a maximum limit on the health care expense to be incurred by the policyholder. Reconsider the previous example in which the policyholder was required to pay 20% of expense associated with their long-term illness. If the related health care expenses are $600,000 over time, the policyholder would have to pay $120,000 (20% of $600,000). However, if the policyholder has a stop-loss provision specifying a $30,000 limit, they would only owe $30,000. The lower the stop-loss limit, the higher the premium.

Factors That Affect Long-Term Care Insurance Premiums
The insurance premium charged for long-term care insurance is influenced by the likelihood that the insurance company will have to cover claims and the size of those claims.

Provisions of Policy
Because the long-term care policy provisions described earlier affect the likelihood and size of claims, they affect the premiums on long-term care insurance.

Age and Sex/Gender
Individuals who are older are more likely to need long-term care insurance, so they are charged higher premiums. Policy premiums are especially high for individuals who are 60 years of age or older. Individuals assigned female at birth tend to live longer than individuals assigned male at birth, so premiums tend to be slightly higher for people in the former group.

Health Condition
Individuals who have an existing long-term illness are more likely to need to file a claim, so they are charged higher premiums.

Reducing Your Cost of Long-Term Care Insurance
When comparing long-term care insurance offered by insurance companies, recognize that a higher premium will be charged for various provisions that provide more comprehensive coverage. You can save money by selecting a policy that contains the provisions that are most important to you. For example, if you can tolerate a longer elimination period before the policy goes into effect, you can reduce your premium. If you think the continued coverage or the inflation-adjustment provisions are not very beneficial to you, select a policy that does not contain these provisions.

Insurance companies charge varying premiums for long-term care insurance policies. You should shop around and compare premiums. Internet quotes are one option. Also, review how insurance premiums charged by the insurance companies have changed over time, because they may serve as an indication of future premiums.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Estimating the Cost of Long-Term Care
Application
Several apps allow you to estimate your cost of long-term care based on your input.

To Find It
Search for “long-term care cost” apps on your mobile device.

Determining the Amount of Coverage
To determine whether you need long-term care insurance, consider your family’s health history. If there is a history of long-term illnesses, then you are more likely to need coverage. In addition, consider your financial situation. If you can afford substantial coverage for long-term insurance, it may be worthwhile. Individuals who are under age 60 and have no serious illnesses can obtain long-term care insurance at reasonable rates.
Disability Insurance
Disability income insurance provides income to policyholders if they become disabled. The probability of becoming disabled in a given year is less than 4% for individuals under age 40 and less than 8% for individuals under age 50. However, the probability is about 15% at age 60, and it continues to increase with age. Thus, disability insurance is especially important for older individuals who rely on their income. However, younger individuals should also consider disability insurance because it provides peace of mind, and the premiums are low. Disability insurance can ensure that you will still be able to support yourself and your dependents if you become disabled.

disability income insurance
Insurance that provides income to policyholders if they become disabled.

One of the most important aspects of disability insurance is the definition of disability. Benefits are paid to you only if you meet the definition of disability as defined by your contract. The most liberal definition (easiest to qualify for) of disability is the “own occupation” definition. The disability insurance contract will provide benefits if you are unable to do the duties required of your occupation. A more restrictive definition of disability is the “any occupation” definition. The “any occupation” coverage will only provide benefits if you cannot do the duties of any job that fits your education and experience. Because the coverage provided by this type of contract is more restrictive, it has a lower premium than “own occupation” policies. Some policies offer coverage if you are unable to do your job in your own occupation for an initial period, such as two years. After that point, they only offer coverage if you are unable to do the duties of any job that fits your education and experience. The Social Security Administration will consider you disabled only if you are disabled for at least five months with the expectation that the disability will last at least 12 months or is likely to result in death.

Sources of Disability Income Insurance
Some of the more common sources of disability income insurance are discussed here.

Individual Disability Insurance
You can purchase individual disability insurance and specify the amount of coverage that you desire. The insurance premium varies with your type of job. For example, workers in a steel plant are more at risk than workers in an office building.

Employer Disability Insurance
About half of all large and medium-sized firms offer an optional disability plan through an insurance company. Employees at some firms either are provided the insurance at no cost or participate in a plan by paying for the coverage. The premiums charged through group plans are normally low. A typical disability contract offered through employers covers about 60% of the employee’s salary. The maximum time that disability benefits are provided varies substantially among policies.

Insurance from Social Security
If you are disabled, you may receive some income from the Social Security Administration. The income is determined by the amount of Social Security contributions you have made over time. The guidelines to qualify for disability benefits from Social Security are strict, meaning that you may not necessarily receive benefits even if you believe that you are disabled. In addition, the income provided by Social Security may not be sufficient to maintain your lifestyle. Therefore, you will probably need disability income insurance to supplement the possible disability benefits that you would receive from Social Security.

Insurance from Worker’s Compensation
If you become disabled at your workplace, you may receive some income through worker’s compensation from the state where you reside. The income you receive is influenced by your prevailing salary level. Disability income insurance may supplement any benefits that you would receive from worker’s compensation.

Disability Insurance Provisions
The specific characteristics of disability insurance vary among insurance companies, as explained here.

Amount of Coverage
The disability insurance contract specifies the amount of income that will be provided if you become disabled. The amount may be specified as a maximum dollar amount or as a percentage of the income that you were earning before being disabled. Typically, short-term policies replace 60% to 70% of your salary for a period ranging from a few months to a year. Policies that extend for a longer period cover 40% to 60% of your salary. The higher your coverage, the more you will pay for disability insurance.

You should have enough coverage so that you can maintain your lifestyle and still support your dependents if you become disabled. You can determine the disposable (after-tax) income that you would normally need to support your lifestyle and your dependents.

Probationary Period
You may be subject to a probationary period, which extends from the time your application is approved until your coverage goes into effect. A common probationary period is one month.
probationary period
The period extending from the time your disability income application is approved until your coverage goes into effect.

Waiting Period
The disability insurance contract should specify if there is a waiting period (such as a month or six months) before you would begin to receive any income benefits. A short-term contract that pays benefits for only a few months might have only a two-week waiting period, while a contract that pays for a long period might have a waiting period of three to six months. You will have to cover your expenses during the waiting period. For example, if you become disabled today, and your contract specifies a three-month waiting period, you will receive benefits only if your disability lasts beyond the three-month period. One reason for the waiting period is that it eliminates many claims that would occur if people could receive benefits when they were disabled for just a few days or weeks because of a sore neck or back. The premiums for disability insurance would be higher if there were no waiting period or a very short waiting period.

waiting period
The period from the time you are disabled until you begin to receive disability income benefits.

Length of Time for Disability Benefits
Disability benefits may be limited to a few months, a year, or several years or may last for the policyholder’s lifetime. The longer the period in which your contract provides disability income, the more you will pay for disability insurance.

Noncancelable Provision
A noncancelable provision gives you the right to renew the contract each year at the same premium, with no change in the benefits. In exchange, you pay a higher premium now to ensure that it will not be increased in the future.

Renewable Provision
A renewable provision gives you the right to renew the contract with the same benefits. The insurance company can increase your premium if it is increasing the premium for all of its insured customers with the same profile.

Deciding on Disability Insurance
You can contact insurance companies about disability insurance rates or ask your employer’s benefits department whether the insurance is available.
How Health Insurance Fits within Your Financial Plan
The following are the key decisions about health and disability insurance that should be included in your financial plan:

Do you have adequate insurance to protect your wealth?

How much insurance should you plan to have in the future?

Exhibit 12.3 provides an example of how health and disability decisions apply to Stephanie Spratt’s plan.

Exhibit 12.3 How Health and Disability Insurance Fit Within Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Plan

Figure 12.3 Full Alternative Text
Discussion Questions
How would Stephanie’s health and disability insurance purchasing decisions be different if she were a single mother of two children?

How would Stephanie’s health and disability insurance purchasing decisions be affected if she were 35 years old? If she were 50 years old?
Summary
HEALTH INSURANCE. Health insurance covers health care expenses incurred by policyholders. Of those that are insured, 54% have obtained insurance from private insurance companies through group plans provided by their employers, while another 9% have obtained private insurance individually (non-group). The remaining 37% of the insured are covered by government insurance, either Medicaid (covers 19% of all insured) or Medicare (covers 18% of all insured).

PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE. Private health care plans can be classified as managed care plans or indemnity plans. Managed care plans include health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and preferred provider organizations (PPOs), which bill only the amount that is not covered by the plan. HMOs require the use of a specified primary care physician who refers the individual to a specialist when necessary; PPOs allow more flexibility in the choice of the health care provider but require much higher premiums.

A fee-for-service plan reimburses individuals for part or all of the health care expenses they incur from health care providers (such as doctors or hospitals). Individuals are free to decide whether to seek care from a primary care physician or a specialist. They are billed directly by the health care providers and then must complete forms to request reimbursement for the services rendered and prescriptions.

CONTENTS OF HEALTH INSURANCE CONTRACTS. Health care plans (insurance policies) identify the insured persons, describe the location (in the United States only or outside the United States as well) where coverage is provided, whether the policy excludes coverage for preexisting conditions, whether there are options to cancel the contract, the size of the deductible, coinsurance, stop-loss provisions, coverage limits, and coordination of benefits. The health insurance contract will also specify the coverage for rehabilitation, mental health, and pregnancy.

SAVINGS ACCOUNTS TO PAY FOR UNINSURED HEALTH EXPENSES. A health care flexible spending account (HCFSA) is a savings account established by an employer for employees to use pre-tax income to pay for medical expenses. The amount that you set aside each pay period for your flexible spending account is not subject to taxes, so it provides an incentive for you to save in order to pay for potential uninsured health care expenses.

Another option for covering health care expenses not covered by insurance is a health savings account (HSA), which is a savings account that allows you to set aside pre-tax income to pay for unreimbursed medical expenses such as deductibles and co-payments. Any interest earned on the money in the plan is not taxed. An HSA can be used only if you have a high-deductible health plan.

GOVERNMENT HEALTH CARE PLANS. There are two government health plans. The Medicare program provides health insurance to individuals who are 65 years of age or older and qualify for Social Security. The Medicaid program provides health insurance to elderly, blind, and disabled adults and low-income families with dependent children.

HEALTH CARE INSURANCE REGULATIONS. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1986 allows you to continue your health insurance provided through an employer’s plan for 18 months after you stop working for the employer.

The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 allows you to continue health insurance coverage even if you switch jobs. The act is especially important if you have preexisting medical conditions.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 provides subsidies to enable more individuals and families to obtain health insurance. It established essential benefits that must be provided by all policies offered through the government Marketplace or state websites. It also allows you to receive preventive medical services such as annual health exams, mammograms, and screenings for high cholesterol, diabetes, and some types of cancer at no cost under some conditions.

LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE. Long-term care insurance covers expenses associated with long-term illnesses, including care by a nursing home, assisted living facility, or at home. The premiums for long-term care insurance are very high but can be reduced by accepting a longer elimination period.

DISABILITY INSURANCE. Disability insurance provides income to you if you become disabled. It can replace a portion of the income that you would have received had you been able to continue working.

HOW HEALTH INSURANCE FITS WITHIN YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Health care can be costly and could disrupt your progress toward achieving your financial plan. Therefore, you need insurance to protect yourself so that you can continue to achieve your financial goals.
Review Questions
HEALTH INSURANCE. How do individuals benefit from having health insurance? Why has health insurance received a lot of attention recently?

COST OF MEDICAL CARE. Why is the cost of medical care increasing? How does this trend affect the cost of health insurance?

PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE. What is private health insurance?

HEALTH INSURANCE PROVIDERS. Who offers health insurance? Do employers offer health insurance?

FEE-FOR-SERVICE VERSUS MANAGED PLANS. Compare and contrast private health care fee-for-service plans and managed health care plans.

HMO. Describe how a health maintenance organization (HMO) works. What are the advantages and disadvantages of this type of health care coverage?

PPO. What is a preferred provider organization (PPO)? How does it operate?

PPO CHARGES. What is the discount on charge arrangements between health care providers and PPOs? What is the per diem arrangement associated with PPOs?

HMO VERSUS PPO. What questions should you ask when considering an HMO or PPO?

CONTENTS OF HEALTH INSURANCE CONTRACTS. What type of information is contained in a typical health insurance policy?

CONTINUOUS HEALTH CARE COVERAGE. Briefly describe two federal laws intended to ensure that individuals can maintain continuous health care coverage if their employment status changes.

OTHER HEALTH CARE COVERAGE. What are some common types of health care that may be covered in a typical health insurance contract?

DETERMINANTS OF PATIENT COSTS. What factors determine how much the policyholder must pay for a given claim?

FLEXIBLE SPENDING ACCOUNT. What is a flexible spending account? Why do some individuals allocate a minimal amount to this account?

MEDICARE. What is Medicare? Describe Parts A and B of Medicare.

GOVERNMENT HEALTH CARE MARKETPLACE. What are the 10 essential health benefits that all plans offered on the Marketplace or the state websites must provide?

MEDIGAP INSURANCE. What is Medigap insurance?

HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNT. What is a health savings account (HSA)? Why is this account often preferable to a flexible spending account?

MEDICAID. What is Medicaid? How do individuals qualify for Medicaid?

LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE. What is the purpose of long-term care insurance? What factors influence long-term care insurance premiums? What factors should be considered when purchasing long-term care insurance?

DISABILITY INCOME INSURANCE. What is the purpose of disability income insurance? Why might younger individuals consider purchasing disability insurance?

SOURCE OF DISABILITY INSURANCE. Briefly describe some of the sources of disability income insurance.

PROVISIONS OF DISABILITY INSURANCE. Briefly describe some of the provisions of disability income insurance.

AFFORDABLE CARE ACT. Briefly describe some of the significant features of the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

VISION INSURANCE. What types of services are typically covered by vision insurance? Why should some individuals consider buying a separate vision insurance policy?

HIGH-DEDUCTIBLE HEALTH PLAN. What is a high-deductible health plan? How is this type of plan related to an HSA?

PREEXISTING CONDITIONS. How did the ACA change the way insurance companies treat persons with preexisting conditions?

HEALTH INSURANCE AND WEALTH. How are health insurance and disability insurance related to your wealth?

