Chapter 5Banking and Interest Rates

Wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock

When Shawna arrived on campus for her first year of college, she relied on an automated teller machine (ATM) to obtain cash for the many little necessities of college life (food, movies, and more food). It was only on a weekend trip back home, where she reviewed her latest bank statement, that Shawna became aware of a problem. Her bank statement showed 40 separate charges for ATM fees. She had been charged $3.00 for each trip to an “out-of-network” ATM not owned by her bank. Another $2 fee was charged by the bank that owned the ATM, so each ATM visit created two charges. In addition, Shawna discovered that she had made five balance inquiries on “out-of-network” ATMs, and her bank charged $1 for each of them. Altogether, for her 17 visits to the ATM, Shawna had accrued $240 in ATM fees. Shocked at this discovery, Shawna found a bank that offered a mobile app with an ATM locator that would enable her to easily find no-fee ATMS. The mobile app also allows her to check her account balance at any time, so she will always be aware if she is being charged fees.

This chapter explains how to use a financial institution to manage your daily cash flow. A good bank is an essential component of liquidity, whether you are depositing funds in an interest-earning account or need to access additional funds temporarily. The bank sets interest rates on your deposits and any loan you might take out. Interest rates fluctuate frequently and are dependent on several factors, as discussed later in this chapter.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Describe the types and functions of financial institutions.

Describe the banking services offered by financial institutions.

Explain how to select a financial institution for personal use.

Identify the components of interest rates.

Explain why interest rates change over time.

Explain how banking services fit within your financial plan.
Types of Financial Institutions
Individuals rely on financial institutions when they want to invest or borrow funds. Financial institutions are commonly categorized as either depository or nondepository institutions.

Depository Institutions
Depository institutions are financial institutions that offer traditional checking and savings accounts for individuals or firms and also provide loans. They pay interest on savings deposits and charge interest on loans. The interest rate charged on loans is higher than the interest rate paid on deposits. The institutions use the difference to cover expenses and to generate earnings for their owners.

depository institutions
Financial institutions that accept deposits (which are insured up to a maximum level) from individuals and provide loans.

Depository institutions are skilled in assessing the ability of prospective borrowers to repay loans. This is a critical part of their business, because the interest from loans is a key source of their revenue.

Depository institutions can be categorized as commercial banks, savings institutions, or credit unions. Their services overlap, but there are some differences, as explained next.

Commercial Banks
Commercial banks are financial institutions that accept deposits in checking and savings accounts and use the funds to provide commercial (business) and personal loans. The checking accounts normally do not pay interest. The savings accounts pay interest, and certain other accounts pay interest and can be used to write checks. These accounts are described in more detail in Chapter 6.

commercial banks
Financial institutions that accept deposits and use the funds to provide commercial (business) and personal loans.

Deposits at commercial banks are insured up to $250,000 per depositor by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), a government-owned insurance agency that ensures the safety of bank deposits. You are not charged for deposit insurance. During the financial crisis in 2008–2009, several banks experienced problems because many of their mortgage loans defaulted. Depositors were protected as long as the deposits were insured by the FDIC. Without deposit insurance, the impact of the crisis on individuals would have been much worse.

Commercial banks provide personal loans for the purchase of a car or other big-ticket items. They also offer mortgage loans for purchasing a home. Some commercial banks issue credit cards for their customers.

Savings Institutions
Savings institutions (also referred to as thrift institutions) accept deposits and provide mortgage and personal loans to individuals. They differ from commercial banks in that they tend to focus less on providing commercial loans. They typically offer the same types of checking and savings deposits as banks, and these deposits are also insured up to $250,000 per depositor by the FDIC. Like commercial banks, savings institutions also experienced problems during the financial crisis because many of their mortgage loans defaulted. However, depositors at savings institutions insured by the FDIC were protected.

savings institutions (or thrift institutions)
Financial institutions that accept deposits and provide mortgage and personal loans to individuals.

Credit Unions
Credit unions are nonprofit depository institutions that serve members who have a common affiliation (such as the same employer or community). Credit unions have been created to serve the employees of specific hospitals, universities, and even some corporations. They offer their members deposit accounts that are similar to the accounts offered by commercial banks and savings institutions; the accounts are insured by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF) for up to $250,000 per member. Credit unions also provide mortgage and personal loans to their members. They may even issue credit cards, and the financing rates on these cards are sometimes lower than those issued by other types of financial institutions.

credit unions
Nonprofit depository institutions that serve members who have a common affiliation (such as the same employer or the same community).
Nondepository Institutions
Nondepository institutions provide various financial services but do not receive federal insurance for their deposits. The main types of nondepository institutions that serve individuals are finance companies, securities firms, insurance companies, and investment companies.

nondepository institutions
Financial institutions that do not offer federally insured deposit accounts but provide various other financial services.

Finance Companies
Finance companies specialize in providing personal loans to individuals. These loans may be used for various purposes, such as purchasing a car or other products or adding a room to a home. Finance companies tend to charge relatively high rates on loans because they lend to individuals whom they perceive to have a higher risk of defaulting on the loans. When the economy weakens, borrowers may have more difficulty repaying loans, causing finance companies to be subject to even higher levels of loan defaults. For example, during the financial crisis of 2008–2009, many individuals lost their jobs and were unable to repay their personal loans. Thus, finance companies experienced more defaults on the personal loans that they provided.

finance companies
Nondepository institutions that specialize in providing personal loans to individuals.

Securities Firms
Securities firms facilitate the purchase or sale of securities (such as stocks or bonds) by firms or individuals by offering investment banking services and brokerage services. Investment banking services include (1) placing securities that are issued by firms with institutional investors who wish to purchase those securities; (2) advising firms regarding the sale of securities, which involves determining the price at which the securities may be sold and the quantity of securities that should be sold; and (3) advising firms that are considering mergers about the valuation of a firm, the potential benefits of being acquired or of acquiring another firm, and the financing necessary for the merger to occur. These services are primarily intended for other companies.

securities firms
Nondepository institutions that facilitate the purchase or sale of securities by firms or individuals by providing investment banking services and brokerage services.

In addition to offering investment banking services, securities firms also provide brokerage services, which facilitate the trading of existing securities. That is, the firms execute trades of securities for their customers. One customer may desire to sell a specific stock while another may want to buy that stock. Brokerage firms create a market for stocks and bonds by matching willing buyers and sellers. This type of service is frequently used by individuals.

Insurance Companies
Insurance companies are nondepository institutions that provide insurance to protect individuals or firms from the financial consequences of possible adverse events. Specifically, life insurance companies provide insurance in the event of a person’s death. Property and casualty companies provide insurance against damage to property, including automobiles and homes. Health insurance companies insure against specific types of health care costs. Insurance serves a crucial function for individuals because it compensates them (or their beneficiaries) in the event of adverse conditions that could otherwise ruin their financial situation. Chapters 11–13 discuss these types of insurance in detail.

insurance companies
Nondepository institutions that provide insurance to protect individuals or firms from the financial consequences of possible adverse events.

Investment Companies
Investment companies pool money provided by individuals to create mutual funds, which contain large portfolios of stocks and/or bonds. The minimum amount an individual can invest in a mutual fund is typically between $500 and $3,000. An individual who invests in a mutual fund is part owner of that portfolio, along with thousands of other individuals who invested in the mutual fund. Thus, mutual funds provide a means by which investors with a small amount of money can invest in a large portfolio of securities. More than 7,000 mutual funds are available to individual investors in the United States. More details on mutual funds are provided in Chapter 17.
investment companies
Nondepository institutions that sell shares to individuals and use the proceeds to invest in securities to create mutual funds.

Financial Conglomerates
Financial conglomerates offer a diverse set of financial services to individuals or firms. They are usually formed as a result of mergers between two different types of financial institutions, such as a commercial bank merging with a securities firm and an insurance company. Examples of financial conglomerates include Citigroup and Bank of America.

financial conglomerates
Financial institutions that offer a diverse set of financial services to individuals or firms.

In addition to accepting deposits and providing personal loans, a financial conglomerate may also offer credit cards. It may have a brokerage subsidiary that can execute stock transactions for individuals. It may also have an insurance subsidiary that offers insurance services. It may even have an investment company subsidiary that offers mutual funds containing stocks or bonds. Exhibit 5.1 shows the types of services offered by a typical financial conglomerate. By offering all types of financial services, the conglomerate aims to serve as a one-stop shop where individuals can conduct all their financial activities.

Exhibit 5.1 How a Financial Conglomerate Serves Individuals

Figure 5.1 Full Alternative Text
Banking Services Offered
A depository institution may offer you a wide variety of banking services. Although a nondepository institution does not offer banking services, it may own a subsidiary that can provide banking services. Some of the more important banking services offered to individuals are described here.

Checking Services
You use a checking account to draw on funds by using a debit card, making online payments, or writing checks against your account. Most individuals maintain a checking account for paying bills or for making large purchases. Although people today increasingly use debit cards, online payment systems, or mobile apps for making payments, checks are still used, especially for large transactions.

To illustrate how your checking account works, suppose that you write a check for $4,000 to your college to pay your fall tuition. The college deposits your check at the bank where it has an account. The bank electronically increases the college’s account balance by $4,000. At the same time, it reduces your checking account balance by $4,000 if your account is at that same bank. If your checking account is at another bank, the bank receiving the check sends an electronic signal to that bank to reduce your balance by $4,000.

Debit Cards
A debit card is a payment card that can be used to make purchases that are charged against the cardholder’s checking account. If you use a debit card to pay $100 to a car repair shop, your checking account balance is reduced by $100, while the account balance at the car repair shop is increased by $100. Thus, using a debit card has the same result as writing a check from your checking account. Most individuals prefer to use a debit card because it is easier to carry than their checkbook. Many merchants accept payments by debit card. In fact, some merchants may accept payments by debit card but not by check because they fear that a check may bounce (meaning the check may not be honored by the bank where the checking account is established).

debit card
A card that is used to make purchases that are charged against a checking account.

Although a debit card looks similar to a credit card, a debit card is intended to be used for convenience; it does not provide credit. That is, the holder can use a debit card only to make purchases up to the amount of their checking account balance. The use of a debit card does not create debt and can be especially valuable for individuals who prefer that their purchases be constrained by the balance in their checking account. In contrast, a credit card allows individuals to spend beyond their checking account balance but creates a debt to the credit card holder that must be repaid.

Although debit cards are convenient, they have some disadvantages. If your debit card is stolen, the thief can empty your entire checking account within a very short time, perhaps by using the debit card to make online purchases. Although you are not liable for the loss if you immediately report the stolen card to your bank, the bank may not restore the funds to your account for some time. If you fail to report a stolen debit card for more than 60 calendar days after receiving your account statement from the bank, you are liable for the entire loss. If your debit card is stolen, call the bank immediately to report the theft and then send a follow-up letter as well. To prevent a thief from using your debit card to withdraw cash from your account at an ATM, never keep your personal identification number (PIN) with your debit card.

Another possible disadvantage of debit cards is that if you use your card for many transactions, you might forget to make a record of all transactions. As a result, you will have less money in your account than you think you have, and you could overdraw your account and incur overdraft fees.

Mobile Banking
Many financial institutions now offer mobile applications that enable you to bank via your smartphone. Using your phone, you can check your account balance and review recent transactions. If you use your debit card frequently and don’t want to have to keep a record of your transactions, these apps can help you avoid overdrawing your account. Some apps will send you a text alert if your balance falls below a certain level. Such apps can be especially useful if you use your debit card to buy gasoline for your car. Because you have to swipe your card before pumping the gas, the payment system cannot charge your account immediately for the exact cost of your purchase. Instead, the system may freeze an amount in your account that is sufficient to pay for 25 or more gallons of gasoline even if you buy only 5 gallons. The freeze will be lifted in a day or so, but until it is, $50 or $100 in your account could be frozen, causing you to overdraw the account unless you’re aware of the available balance.

Most financial institutions’ apps also allow you to use your smartphone to deposit checks that you receive. You simply endorse the check on the back, photograph the front and back of the check, and transmit the photographs to your bank via your phone. An app will also help you find your bank’s closest ATM when you need cash.

You may be able to use your smartphone instead of a debit card. Applications such as Apple Pay and Google Pay allow you to pay for purchases by simply waving your smartphone in front of a machine instead of swiping your debit card. Merchants are increasingly accepting this form of payment.

Paying Bills on Time
Your checking account provides a quick and convenient means of paying bills. Psychological forces influence how people pay bills, but almost no one enjoys the process. Some people try to avoid the stress of bill paying by ignoring their bills, perhaps with the hope that their creditors will forget about them. But creditors remember what they are owed—if you fail to pay a bill by the deadline, you will receive a late notice and will be charged a late fee.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Your Banking Services
Application
The Chase Mobile app (by JPMorgan Chase & Co.) allows bank customers who have established an account to pay bills and credit cards, transfer money between accounts, and check their cash balance. Other financial institutions that you use may offer apps like this.

To Find It
Search for the Chase Mobile app on your mobile device.

If you frequently incur late fees, consider keeping a schedule of your deadlines on your calendar. By avoiding these fees, you will have more money that you can use in other ways. You can also avoid late payments by setting up an online payment system at your bank’s website, which will allow payments to be made automatically from your checking account each month to cover bills before the due date. Automatic payments are especially useful for bills that are the same (or nearly the same) amount each month, such as your Internet access bill. If a bill varies considerably from month to month, such as the heating bill for your apartment, you may not want to have it paid automatically. Instead, you can set up the online system so that you enter the exact amount to be paid each month.

Checking Account Fees
Most financial institutions charge a monthly fee for a checking account, but there are usually ways to avoid the fee or at least reduce it substantially. Because the fees can easily amount to more than $100 per year, you have an incentive to try to avoid them. Most banks waive the monthly fee if you maintain a minimum balance in your account. Although the required minimum balance may be as much as $1,500 or higher, some banks require only $100 or so. Therefore, it pays to compare the required minimum balance among financial institutions before you select one.

Some banks also waive or reduce the monthly fee if you authorize direct deposits to your account each month. Many companies will use direct deposit for your paycheck, so ask your employer if that can be arranged. If you are comfortable with online and mobile banking, you will find that many banks will not charge you a monthly fee if you do all your banking transactions through the Internet and ATMs, which costs the banks much less than if you require help from employees at the branches. Finally, some banks offer no-fee checking accounts for students or veterans, although these accounts may allow you to write only a small number of checks per month.

Monitoring Your Account Balance
As you use funds from your checking account, you should record each transaction in your checkbook whether you’re writing a check or using a debit card, a mobile app, or an automatic payment system so you can always determine how much money is in your account. By keeping track of your account balance, you can make sure that there are funds in your account when you want to use them. This is important because you may be charged fees if you write a check that bounces or if there are insufficient funds in your account to make an automatic payment that you have requested. You may also be charged a monthly fee if your balance falls below the required minimum. Most financial institutions allow you to access your account at their website to check your balance online, but you should also keep a record of all of your transactions so that you can ensure that your balance according to your financial institution is accurate.

Reconciling Your Account Balance
Financial institutions normally send a checking account statement once a month. If you have signed up for online banking, you may receive the statement by e-mail. When you receive your bank statement, you should make sure that the statement reconciles (agrees) with your record of transactions in your check register. Make sure that all deposits are listed, whether the deposits were made by direct deposit, via your smartphone, or at an ATM or bank branch. Then compare the checks in your register with those listed on the statement. Put a checkmark in your register beside the checks that the statement indicates have cleared (been deducted from your account). Next, compare all your electronic transactions, debit card purchases, and ATM withdrawals with those on the statement. To reconcile the balance in your register with the balance on the statement, subtract any uncleared checks or unprocessed transactions from the statement balance. The result should equal the balance in your check register.

Example
Last month the balance in your checking account was $800. This month you deposited $100 to your account. You wrote two checks that cleared, totaling $200, and used your debit card for three purchases, totaling $300. You did not withdraw any funds from the account, and no fees were charged this month. Your balance for this month is as follows:

Last month’s balance	 	$800
+
 Deposits	
+
$100
 Checks that cleared	
−
$200
−
 Debit card purchases	
−
$300
=
 New balance	
=
$400
In a month when you have no fees or withdrawals, the balance in your register should be the same as the balance on your statement as long as all the checks that you wrote have cleared. But if you had written a check that has not yet cleared, the balance on your statement would exceed the balance in your register by the amount of that check. If you write a check for $100, you can record that payment in your register immediately at the time of payment. However, the balance on your checking account statement will not include this payment until the check clears. This delay can cause some individuals to think that they have more money available than they really do and therefore might cause them to spend beyond the balance that is in their checking account. For this reason, do not rely on the monthly statement to determine your daily balance.

Many banks provide a worksheet that can be used to reconcile your account balance. An example of a reconciliation worksheet is shown in Exhibit 5.2. Your account balance can be compared with the balance shown on the bank statement. If there is a discrepancy, your calculated balance may be wrong, or the bank’s statement could be incorrect. The first step is to verify your math in your check register and then double-check your math on the reconciliation worksheet. If you still cannot resolve the discrepancy, contact the bank.

Exhibit 5.2 Example of a Workshe

Figure 5.2 Full Alternative Text
You may think that reconciling your balance is a waste of time because you can easily check your balance online and review your recent transactions there, but the reconciliation is useful for several reasons. First, banks rarely make errors with checking accounts, but errors are possible, so you should always review your account. Second, you should check all the debit card transactions to make sure that all of them are valid and that no one has used your card without permission. Finally, reviewing all of your monthly transactions enables you to understand where your money is going. When you realize that you spent more than $100 last month on your daily cappuccino, you may rethink your coffee habits.

When you write a check, your checking account balance is not reduced until the check is cashed by the recipient and the check clears. The time from when you write a check until your checking account balance is reduced is referred to as the float. However, the electronic communications within the banking system now allow many checking transactions to clear immediately. Therefore, make sure you have sufficient funds in your checking account before writing a check.

Savings Accounts
In addition to checking accounts, financial institutions offer savings accounts, where you can deposit money that you do not intend to use for daily expenses. Unlike most checking accounts, savings accounts pay interest on the funds deposited there. You cannot write checks on the funds in your savings account or use the funds for purchases with a debit card. However, you can transfer funds from your savings account to your checking account. Most institutions allow you to make transfers at ATMs, by accessing the bank’s website, or by calling an automated phone system. Some institutions also offer mobile apps for transfers. The number of transfers that you can make in a month without being charged a fee may be limited. Therefore, make sure that you transfer enough funds to cover your monthly expenses so that you aren’t charged a fee for excess transfers.

Credit Card Financing
Individuals use credit cards to purchase products and services on credit. At the end of each billing cycle, you receive a bill for the credit you used over that period. Mastercard and Visa cards allow you to finance your purchases through various financial institutions. Thus, if you can pay only the minimum balance on your card, the financial institution will finance the outstanding balance and charge interest for the credit that it provides to you.

Safety Deposit Boxes
Many financial institutions offer access to a safety deposit box, where a customer can store valuable documents, certificates, jewelry, or other items. Customers are charged an annual fee for access to a safety deposit box.

safety deposit box
A box at a financial institution where a customer can store documents, jewelry, or other valuables.
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)
Bank customers can deposit and withdraw funds at an automated teller machine (ATM) by using their ATM card and entering their personal identification number (PIN). Located in numerous convenient locations, these machines allow customers access to their funds 24 hours a day, any day of the year. Some financial institutions have ATMs throughout the United States and in foreign countries. You can usually use ATMs from financial institutions other than your own, but you may be charged a service fee, which is often at least $1 per transaction. Some banks now offer mobile apps that allow customers to deposit and withdraw funds at ATMs by using their smartphone instead of a card. Accessing ATMs by smartphone is safer than using a debit card because thieves may attach tiny (almost invisible) devices to ATMs that can read the data on a card and record a PIN. Then the thieves can use the information to access an account. Thieves tend to target ATMs where there is little traffic because they can more easily attach their devices to the machines without being noticed.

automated teller machine (ATM)
A machine where individuals can deposit and withdraw funds any time of the day.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Finding an ATM Nearby
Application
Several apps allow you to find a nearby ATM. You can use your current location when searching or input an address.

To Find It
Search for “ATM locator” or “ATM nearby” on the app store on your mobile device.

Cashier’s Checks
A cashier’s check is a check that is written on behalf of a person to a specific payee and will be charged against a financial institution’s account. It is especially useful when the payee is concerned that a personal check may bounce. You can go to the bank where you maintain your checking account and request that the bank write a cashier’s check to the payee. Your bank might charge you a fee of between $10 and $20 for this service. The payee can trust that this check will not bounce because the bank guarantees payment.

cashier’s check
A check that is written on behalf of a person to a specific payee and will be charged against a financial institution’s account.

Money Orders
A money order is a check that is written on behalf of a person for a fixed amount that is paid in advance. The U.S. Post Office and some financial institutions provide this service for a fee. A money order is a better alternative than cash when you need to mail funds.

money order
A check that is written on behalf of a person for a fixed amount that is paid in advance.

Traveler’s Checks
A traveler’s check is a check that is written on behalf of an individual and will be charged against a large well-known financial institution or credit card sponsor’s account. It is similar to a cashier’s check except that no payee is designated on the check. If traveler’s checks are lost or stolen, the issuer will usually replace them without charge. The fee for traveler’s checks varies among financial institutions.

traveler’s check
A check that is written on behalf of an individual and will be charged against a large well-known financial institution or credit card sponsor’s account.

Increasingly, travelers are using credit cards instead of traveler’s checks. Some issuers including Mastercard issue a prepaid card that has the safety features of traveler’s checks in that the issuer will replace the card without charge if it is lost or stolen.
Selecting a Financial Institution
Because financial institutions can provide many valuable services, you may want to select one financial institution that can provide all the services you need. Your selection of the proper financial institution can save you time and money.

Criteria Used to Select a Financial Institution
Your choice of a financial institution should be based on convenience, the ability to pay bills online, deposit rates and insurance, and fees.

Deposit and Withdrawal Convenience
You should be able to deposit and withdraw funds easily, which means the financial institution should be located close to where you live or work. You may also benefit if it has ATMs in convenient locations. In addition, a financial institution should offer most or all of the services you might need. Most financial institutions offer Internet banking, which allows you to keep track of your deposit accounts and even apply for loans online. You also usually can transfer funds online from one account to another within the institution. For added convenience, many institutions now offer mobile apps that allow you to deposit checks, check your account balance, and transfer funds.

Paying Bills Online
Many financial institutions have established a system in which you can pay bills online instead of writing and sending checks. You establish an online account that is tied to your checking account. You are asked to register online, identify payees, and provide the payee’s address. For each payee, you are prompted to indicate the amount of funds that you would like to have transferred to their account. The financial institution reduces (debits) your account balance by that amount and increases (credits) the account balance of the payee.

By paying bills online, you avoid the need to write checks and send them by mail. You can have payments sent automatically so that you do not need to worry about missing a payment. Your list of payees is stored in your online account so that you can pay your monthly bills quickly and not have to enter the payee information each time you pay bills. You can also track the payments and monitor the history of all bills paid online. You may also monitor the history per payee.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Making Payments to Friends
Application
If you want to make electronic payments to a friend, you can use an app such as Venmo or Zelle. You and the payee just need to register with the app, and you need to provide a bank account number when registering.

To Find It
Search for the Venmo or Zelle app on your mobile device.

Some web-based financial institutions do not have physical branches. For customers who prefer to make deposits at a branch but also want easy online access to their account information, the most convenient financial institutions are those with multiple branches and online access.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.fdic.gov; in the site’s search engine, search for “Cybersecurity.”

To get
Tips for safe banking over the Internet and ways to avoid bank fraud, including identity theft.

Deposit Rates and Insurance
The interest rates offered on deposits vary among financial institutions. You should comparison shop by checking the rates on the types of deposits that you might make. Financial institutions also vary on the minimum required balance. A lower minimum balance on savings accounts is preferable because it gives you more flexibility if you do not want to tie up your funds. Make sure that any deposits are insured by the FDIC or NCUSIF.

Web-based financial institutions tend to pay a higher interest rate on deposits than institutions with physical branches because they have lower expenses and can afford to pay higher deposit rates. Customers must weigh the trade-off of the higher deposit rates against the lack of access to branches.

Customers who prefer to make deposits through the mail may want to capitalize on the higher rates at web-based financial institutions.
Fees
Many financial institutions charge fees for various services such as writing checks or using ATMs. Avoid financial institutions that charge high fees for services you will use frequently, even if the institutions offer relatively high rates on deposits.

Loans
Some depository institutions provide personal loans to individuals. Personal loans are commonly offered to qualified borrowers to finance the purchases of cars or home improvement projects or to cover unexpected expenses. They often range from $5,000 to $40,000, and have a three- to five-year maturity. A fixed interest rate is applied, and a loan repayment must be submitted by the borrower each month to completely pay off the loan by its maturity date. Borrowers who do not repay a personal loan according to the terms of the loan agreement could be subject to a default on the loan, which could adversely affect their credit scores and might even force them to file for bankruptcy.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, economic conditions deteriorated, and many businesses and individuals struggled to keep up with their loan repayment schedules. Some banks and other financial institutions allowed individuals to suspend their loan repayments for several months. They also offered hardship loans to individuals whose financial situation weakened as a result of the pandemic. Interest rates on these loans were very low, and the repayment schedule was often flexible.

Financial Institution Connections with Merchants
Individuals who prefer to do banking through their favorite merchant can get basic banking services at low or no cost by establishing an account at Walmart. While Walmart is not a bank and does not provide loans, it has teamed up with Green Dot Bank to offer low-cost checking accounts (no fee if you set up a direct deposit of at least $500 per month), debit cards, a network of ATMs, online bill paying, and a mobile app. The accounts are insured by the FDIC.
Interest Rates on Deposits and Loans
The return you receive from your deposits at a financial institution and the cost of borrowing money from a financial institution depend on the interest rates. Therefore, your cash inflows and outflows are affected by the interest rates at the time of your transactions with the institution.

Most depository institutions issue certificates of deposit (CDs), which specify a minimum investment, an interest rate, and a maturity date. For example, a bank may require a $500 minimum investment on all the CDs it offers. The maturities may include one month, three months, six months, one year, and five years. The money invested in a particular CD cannot be withdrawn until the maturity date, or it will be subject to a penalty for early withdrawal.

certificate of deposit (CD)
An instrument that is issued by a depository institution and specifies a minimum investment, an interest rate, and a maturity date.

Risk-Free Rate
A risk-free rate is a return on an investment that is guaranteed for a specified period. For example, you can invest in a CD at a commercial bank with a maturity that matches your desired investment horizon. The interest rate offered varies among maturities. An annual interest rate of 6% on your CD means that at the end of one year, you will receive interest equal to 6% of the amount that you originally deposited. When you invest in a CD until its maturity, you are guaranteed the interest rate offered on that CD. Even if the bank goes bankrupt, the CD is insured for its full value up to $250,000 per customer by the federal government, so you will receive your deposit back at the time of maturity.

risk-free rate
A return on an investment that is guaranteed for a specified period.

Risk Premium
Rather than investing in risk-free deposits that are backed by the federal government, you could invest in deposits of some financial firms that offer a higher interest rate. These deposits are sometimes called certificates, but they should not be confused with the CDs that are backed by government insurance. These certificates are subject to default risk, meaning that you could lose your entire investment if the financial firm goes bankrupt. Before investing in any certificates, be sure to review the small print in the description to determine if they are federally insured.

If you have accumulated only a small amount of savings, you should maintain all your savings in a financial institution where deposits are guaranteed by the government. Striving for a higher return could cause you to lose a large portion or even all of your savings.

If you have a substantial amount of money, however, you may consider investing a portion of it in riskier deposits or certificates, but you should expect to be compensated for the risk. Your potential return should contain a risk premium, or an additional return beyond the risk-free rate that you could earn from a deposit guaranteed by the government. The higher the potential default risk of an investment, the higher the risk premium you should expect.

risk premium
An additional return beyond the risk-free rate that can be earned from a deposit guaranteed by the government.

If a deposit not guaranteed by the government offers a specific return (R) over a period and you know the risk-free rate 
(
𝑅
𝑓
)
 offered on a deposit backed by the government, you can determine the risk premium 
(
𝑅
𝑃
)
 offered on the risky deposit:

𝑅
𝑃
=
𝑅
−
𝑅
𝑓
Example
Today, your local commercial bank is offering a one-year CD (which is insured) with an interest rate of 6%, so the existing one-year risk-free rate is 6%. You notice that Metallica Financial Company offers an interest rate of 8% on one-year certificates that are not insured. The risk premium offered by this certificate is the following:

𝑅
𝑃
=
𝑅
−
𝑅
𝑓
=
8
%
−
6
%
=
2
%
You need to decide whether receiving the extra two percentage points in the annual return is worth the default risk. In this case, the potential higher return is probably not sufficient to justify accepting default risk.

Impact of the Economy on the Risk Premium
ECONOMIC IMPACT

As economic conditions change, the risk premium on various types of investments changes. When economic conditions weaken, firms that issue various types of debt securities must pay a higher risk premium to sell their securities. Investors become more concerned that these types of firms might go bankrupt and not repay their debt. Thus, you and other individuals would only consider investing in such debt securities during weak economic conditions if the premium was large enough to compensate for the risk. Conversely, under more favorable economic conditions, firms are in better financial health and are less likely to go bankrupt. Thus, investors are more willing to invest in debt securities issued by firms, and the risk premium is lower.

Twisted Perception of the Risk Premium
When the economy weakens and the risk premium rises (for the reasons just explained), some investors are attracted to investments, but for the wrong reasons. They may decide to pursue investments with higher risk premiums in a weak economy to make up for limited income. However, their logic is irrational. The higher risk premium on investments during a weak economy is offered as compensation to investors for accepting more risk. Investors should not seek more risk in their investments as a substitute for limited job opportunities. In fact, if you have limited income because of a bad economy, a more rational strategy would be to focus on safe investments, even if they offer a lower return, so that you can avoid any losses in case you need the funds that you invested.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance

Comparing Interest Rates and Risk
When considering investments that have different degrees of risk, your choice depends on your risk tolerance. If you plan to use all your invested funds for necessities one year from now, you may need to avoid risk completely. In this case, you should choose a risk-free investment because other investments could be worth less in one year than they are worth today. The trade-off is that you will receive a relatively low rate of interest on your investment.

If you will need only a portion of your initial investment at the time the investment matures, you may be willing to take some risk. In this case, you may prefer an investment that offers a higher interest rate than the risk-free rate but is exposed to the possibility of a loss. You can afford to take some risk because you would still have sufficient funds to pay for your necessities even if the investment results in a loss. However, you should consider a risky investment only if the risk premium on the investment compensates you for the risk.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.bankrate.com and click on “CD Rates.”

To get
High offers for CD rates at financial institutions.

No single choice is optimal for all investors, as the proper choice varies with the investor’s situation and willingness to tolerate risk. Some individuals are more willing to accept risk than others. Each investment decision is based on your risk tolerance, which in turn is influenced by your financial situation. Some people with a large amount of savings who can afford to gamble commonly take risks, but they usually invest in stocks or other types of investments that might generate a very high return.

Comparing Interest Rates among Maturities
When considering bank CDs or other debt securities, the interest rate that you earn commonly varies among maturities. The relationship between the maturity of an investment and the interest rate on the investment is referred to as the term structure of interest rates. The term structure is often based on rates of return (or yields) offered by Treasury securities (which are debt securities issued by the U.S. Treasury) with different maturities. The rates of CDs and Treasury securities with a specific maturity are very similar at a given point in time, so this term structure looks very similar to one for deposit rates of financial institutions. The term structure is important to investors because it provides the risk-free interest rates that can be earned for various maturities.

term structure of interest rates
The relationship between the maturities of risk-free debt securities and the annualized yields offered on those securities.

Exhibit 5.3 provides an example of the term structure of interest rates, the structure that existed in August 2023. The relationship between the maturities and annualized yields (or deposit rates) in Exhibit 5.3 is graphed in Exhibit 5.
shows a slight downward slope, which means that for this one point in time, the annualized interest rates were lower on investments with a longer term to maturity. Thus, the longer the investment horizon you choose at that time, the lower the annualized interest rate you would have received.

Exhibit 5.3 Annualized Deposit Rates Offered on Deposits with Various Maturities

Figure 5.3 Full Alternative Text
Exhibit 5.4 Comparison of Interest Rates among Maturities

Figure 5.4 Full Alternative Text
If you plan to invest in bank CDs and the existing term structure of interest rates is as shown in Exhibit 5.4, which maturity would you select? Consider only those maturities that do not extend beyond the time when you might need to use the funds, because you would be subject to a penalty if you have to withdraw funds before the CD maturity. For example, if you expect to need the funds in one year, you could purchase a one-year CD.

Alternatively, you might consider investing in a CD with a shorter maturity, as the annualized deposit rate is slightly higher for shorter maturities. Once that CD matures, you can reinvest the money in a new CD with a maturity that matches or is shorter than the time when you expect to need the funds. This strategy is especially appealing if you think that interest rates will rise by the time that you reinvest your money in a new CD. You will not know the exact interest rate to be offered on a CD in the future, but you will know the interest rates offered on CDs of all maturities at the time that you are ready to reinvest.

The Impact of Bank Deposit Rates on Bank Loan Rates
Financial institutions obtain many of their funds by accepting deposits from individuals. They use the money to provide loans to other individuals and firms. Financial institutions must charge a higher interest rate on the loans than they pay on the deposits to have sufficient funds to pay for their other expenses and earn a profit. Therefore, to borrow funds, you must normally pay a higher interest rate on the loan than the prevailing rate offered on deposits. The annual interest rate on loans to individuals is often three to five percentage points above the annual rate offered on deposits. For example, if the prevailing annual interest rate on various deposits is 5%, the prevailing annual interest rate on loans to individuals may be 8% to 10%.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.ustreasuryyieldcurve.com

To get
Yields of Treasury securities with various maturities. This information is useful for determining how your return from investing funds in Treasury securities or bank deposits could vary with the maturity you choose.

Exhibit 5.5 shows the relationship between the one-year CD rate and the average one-year rate on loans to individuals. Notice how the loan rate rises in periods when financial institutions must pay a higher rate of interest on the CDs that they offer. This is because the bank sets an interest rate on its loans that is highly influenced by its cost of obtaining funds (how much interest it must pay for deposits). When interest rates on deposits are generally low, financial institutions obtain money at relatively low interest rates and are willing to lend at relatively low interest rates. Conversely, when interest rates are generally high, financial institutions obtain money at relatively high interest rates and provide loans at relatively high loan rates.

Exhibit 5.5 Correlation between Deposit Rates and Loan Rates

Figure 5.5 Full Alternative Text
The interest rate a financial institution charges for a loan often varies among individuals. Higher rates of interest are charged on loans that are exposed to higher default risk. Therefore, individuals with poor credit histories or low incomes will likely be charged higher interest rates.
Why Interest Rates Change
As illustrated in the previous section, interest rates tend to change over time. A change in the risk-free interest rate (such as the interest rate on bank savings deposits) causes other interest rates (such as the interest rate on bank loans) to change in line with the risk-free rate. Therefore, understanding why the risk-free interest rate changes allows you to understand why interest rates change in general.

Shift in Monetary Policy
The money supply consists of demand deposits (checking accounts), savings deposits, and currency held by the public. The money supply is commonly used by investors as an indicator of the amount of funds that financial institutions can provide to consumers or businesses as loans.

money supply
Demand deposits (checking accounts), savings deposits, and currency held by the public.

The U.S. money supply is controlled by the Federal Reserve System (called “the Fed”), which is the central bank of the United States. The act of controlling the money supply is referred to as monetary policy. The Fed’s monetary policy affects the money supply, which can influence interest rates.

monetary policy
The actions taken by the Federal Reserve System to control the money supply.

The Use of Open Market Operations to Reduce Interest Rates
The Fed conducts monetary policy through open market operations, which involve buying or selling Treasury securities (debt securities issued by the Treasury). The Fed holds some funds in reserve outside of the banking system. When it wants to reduce interest rates, it injects some of its reserve funds into the banking system. Put another way, it floods the banking system with more money. Specifically, it uses some of its reserve funds to purchase Treasury securities held by investors, and investors commonly deposit the proceeds into their banks. Thus, there is an increase in the amount of money in banks.

open market operations
The buying or selling of Treasury securities.

Recall that banks tend to use much of the money that is deposited by investors to provide loans to borrowers. Imagine a typical bank that suddenly has much more money to lend than in the previous month as a result of the Fed’s monetary policy that injected money into the banking system. This bank may now have more money in the form of deposits than it can loan out to creditworthy borrowers. Thus, it might reduce its interest rate offered on savings deposits because it already has more than enough deposits for its business. As it lowers its interest rate offered on deposits, it will also lower its interest rate offered on loans to attract enough creditworthy borrowers that it can lend out all of its money.

Apply the point about a single bank in the preceding paragraph to all banks in the banking system. If all banks are experiencing a similar surplus of deposited funds, they would take similar actions, and the interest rates on savings deposits and loans among all banks should decline simultaneously. In general, when banks have more money to lend than the amount that borrowers are willing to borrow, banks may lower their interest rates to discourage depositors from depositing more money and to entice more potential creditworthy borrowers.

The Use of Open Market Operations to Raise Interest Rates
When the Fed wants to increase interest rates, it pulls money out of the banking system. Specifically, it sells some of the Treasury securities that it had previously purchased to investors who are willing to purchase those securities. As these investors write checks to make payments for those Treasury securities, their checking account balances at banks are reduced. Thus, there is a decrease in the amount of funds (money) held by banks.

Imagine a typical bank that suddenly has less money (in the form of deposits) to lend than in the previous month as a result of the Fed’s monetary policy that pulled funds from the banking system. The amount of funds that it can provide to borrowers in the form of loans is restricted by the amount of deposits in its accounts. This bank may now have a smaller amount of funds (in the form of deposits) than what its creditworthy borrowers would be willing to borrow. Thus, the bank may raise its interest rate on bank deposits to attract more deposits so that it could fully accommodate its prospective borrowers. Furthermore, it may charge a higher interest rate on its loans and may still be able to lend out the limited amount of funds that it presently has available.

Apply the point about a single bank in the preceding paragraph to all banks in the banking system. If all banks are experiencing a similar shortage of deposited funds, they would take similar actions, and the interest rates on savings deposits and loans among all banks should increase simultaneously. In general, when banks have less money to lend than the amount that borrowers are willing to borrow, banks may raise their interest rates to encourage depositors to make more deposits, while limiting the loans they can give to potential creditworthy borrowers.
The Impact of the Fed’s Monetary Policy on the Economy
More important than the technical explanation of how the Fed changes interest rates with monetary policy is how those changes in the interest rates affect the U.S. economy. To understand why changes in interest rates can have such a large impact on economic conditions, answer the following questions.

If you could obtain a loan today at an annual interest rate of:	What is the likelihood that you would accept the loan (very unlikely, possibly, most likely)?
20%	 
10%	 
5%	 
3%	 
1%	 
Your likelihood of borrowing should be higher as the interest rate offered on the loan is lowered, because the expense to you of repaying the loan would be reduced. If the entire population of creditworthy borrowers in the United States were asked the same questions, their answers would be similar to your answers. So imagine what the level of borrowing might be if the interest rate offered to these borrowers could be reduced. To the extent that the Fed has control over the interest rates in the United States, it can heavily influence the amount of funds borrowed by adjusting interest rates. If the Fed wants to encourage more borrowing so that those borrowers spend all that money and stimulate the economy, it should lower interest rates. Conversely, if the Fed wants to reduce the level of borrowing, to reduce the amount of spending with borrowed funds, it should raise interest rates.

Monetary Policy during the Financial Crisis of 2008–2009
During the financial crisis in 2008–2009, economic conditions weakened. The Federal Reserve responded by lowering interest rates, and it kept them low for many years. In general, firms and individuals were more willing to borrow in response to the lower interest rates, and they spent those borrowed funds, causing the economy to strengthen over the next several years.

Monetary Policy during the COVID-19 Pandemic
During the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, the economy weakened as many stores and restaurants closed. The Fed responded by lowering interest rates, so that by 2021 the deposit rates at most banks were 0%. As a result of the Fed’s actions to lower deposit rates, banks were willing to provide personal loans at very low rates, often providing 30-year mortgage loans at an interest rate of 3%, which was appealing to prospective home buyers. The low mortgage rate caused a major surge in home purchases. Thus, the Fed was able to stimulate the economy with its monetary policy. The process by which the Fed can stimulate the economy with monetary policy is summarized in Exhibit 5.6.

Exhibit 5.6 How the Fed Can Stimulate the Economy

Figure 5.6 Full Alternative Text
Monetary Policy during the High Inflation Period of 2022–2023
By 2022, the U.S. economy had improved, primarily due to home-buying activity. However, there was some concern that the strong economy would cause an excessive demand for products and services, resulting in higher prices (inflation). And that concern was validated, as inflation rates reached a high of about 9% in June 2022, which meant that the prices of products that they tracked had increased by 9% on average over the previous year. This was a major problem because high inflation limits the ability of consumers to maintain their standard of living, especially if their income levels are not increasing to the same degree. For this reason, the Fed normally attempts to keep inflation at about 2% on an annual basis.

During the 2022–2023 period, the Fed implemented a plan to reduce inflation based on slowing economic growth. The logic was that if economic growth were reduced, there would no longer be upward pressure on prices caused by excessive demand for products and services. To achieve its goal, the Fed raised interest rates substantially over this period, causing deposit rates to rise to 5% and loan rates to rise as well. The rates on mortgage loans rose to about 7%, which reduced the demand for homes by home buyers. Overall,
the Fed’s policy of raising interest rates had the favorable effect of reducing the high inflation in the United States. The process by which the Fed attempts to slow economic growth and reduce inflation with monetary policy is summarized in Exhibit 5.7.

Exhibit 5.7 How the Fed Can Reduce Inflation

Figure 5.7 Full Alternative Text
Shift in the Government Demand for Funds
The U.S. government frequently borrows substantial amounts of funds. Any shift in the U.S. government’s borrowing behavior can affect the aggregate demand for funds and therefore can affect the interest rate. If the U.S. government suddenly needs to borrow more funds than it normally borrows, the total amount of funds demanded will be larger, which results in a shortage of funds at the original interest rate. This places upward pressure on the interest rate.

Conversely, if the government reduces the amount that it borrows, the total amount of funds demanded will be smaller, which results in a surplus of funds at the original interest rate. This places downward pressure on the interest rate.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.bankrate.com and search for the term “federal reserve.”

To get
Updated information about the Fed’s recent actions and upcoming meetings, as well as forecasts of future policy decisions and the potential impact of these decisions.

Shift in the Business Demand for Funds
When economic conditions change, businesses review their spending plans and adjust their demand for funds. This shift in demand affects the interest rate. If businesses have become more optimistic about the economy, they may expect an increase in consumer demand for the products they produce. Consequently, they will be more willing to expand and must borrow more funds to support their expansion. Their actions result in an increase in the total demand for funds, similar to the effect of increased government borrowing. This places upward pressure on the interest rate.

Conversely, if the economy weakens, businesses cut back on their expansion efforts and reduce the amount of funds borrowed, so that the total amount of funds demanded will be smaller at the original interest rate. This places downward pressure on the interest rate.

Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Demand for Funds
ECONOMIC IMPACT

As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, economic conditions weakened substantially in the United States. This caused a shift in the demand for funds by the U.S. government and by businesses, but in opposite directions. The U.S. government borrowed a large amount of money that it spent in various ways to stimulate the economy. Such a large demand for funds would normally cause interest rates to rise. However, many businesses reduced their expansion plans in response to the weak economy and therefore reduced their demand for funds. Therefore, the actions by the U.S. government and businesses had offsetting effects on the interest rate.

However, the Fed pumped a large amount of money into the banking system during this period in response to the weak economy. As a result, interest rates declined abruptly, such that deposit rates at banks fell to 0% in 2020. This result was exactly what the Fed was trying to accomplish, to entice the banks to reduce their lending rates. As mentioned earlier, banks responded by reducing their loan rates to very low levels, which stimulated the economy in 2021 by encouraging businesses and people to borrow and spend money
How Banking Services Fit within Your Financial Plan
The key banking decisions for your financial plan are the following:

What banking service characteristics are most important to you?

What financial institution provides the best banking service characteristics for you?

As an example, Exhibit 5.8 shows how banking service decisions apply to Stephanie Spratt’s financial plan.

Exhibit 5.8 How Banking Services Fit within Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Plan
Figure 5.8 Full Alternative Text
Discussion Questions
How would Stephanie’s banking service decisions be different if she were a single mother of two children?

How would Stephanie’s banking service decisions be affected if she were 35 years old? If she were 50 years old?
Summary
TYPES OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS. Depository institutions (commercial banks, savings institutions, and credit unions) accept deposits and provide loans. Nondepository institutions include insurance companies (which provide insurance), securities firms (which provide brokerage and other services), and investment companies (which offer mutual funds). Financial conglomerates offer a wide variety of these financial services so that individuals can obtain all their financial services from a single firm.

BANKING SERVICES. Important services offered by financial institutions include checking and debit card services, savings accounts, credit card financing, automated teller machines, mobile banking services, cashier’s checks, and money orders.

SELECTING A FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Financial institutions differ in the types of services that they offer, the interest rates that they pay for deposits or charge for loans, and the fees that they charge for providing services. You should compare the services offered, interest rates, and fees among financial institutions to identify the financial institution that would be most suitable and convenient for you.

INTEREST RATE COMPONENTS. An interest rate is composed of the risk-free rate and the risk premium. The risk-free rate is the rate of interest paid on an investment that has no risk over a specific investment period (such as a bank deposit backed by government insurance). The risk premium is the additional amount above the risk-free rate that risky investments offer. The higher an investment’s risk, the higher the risk premium it must offer to entice investors.

WHY INTEREST RATES CHANGE. Interest rates change in response to monetary policy. When the Fed pumps more money into the banking system, it increases the supply of available funds, and this reduces interest rates. It can also pull funds out of the banking system, which has the opposite effect.

When the federal government or businesses borrow more funds, this places upward pressure on interest rates. When they reduce their borrowing, this reduces interest rates. However, during crisis periods, the influence of these factors is overwhelmed by the Fed’s monetary policy.

HOW BANKING SERVICES FIT WITHIN YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Banking services enable you to effectively execute financial transactions such as bill paying, saving, and borrowing. Thus, they help you to achieve your financial plan.
Review Questions
TYPES OF DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS. Describe and compare the three types of depository institutions.

TYPES OF NONDEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS. List and describe the four main types of nondepository financial institutions.

FINANCIAL CONGLOMERATE. What is a financial conglomerate? List some services financial conglomerates provide. Give some examples of financial conglomerates.

BANKING SERVICES. List and describe some of the banking services offered by financial institutions.

FDIC. What is the FDIC? Why is FDIC insurance important?

DEBIT VERSUS CREDIT CARD. What is the difference between a debit card and a credit card?

SPECIAL SERVICES. Name some special services that banks provide. How might you make use of them?

SELECTING A BANK. Steve just received his first paycheck and wants to open a checking account. There are five banks in his hometown. What factors should Steve consider when choosing a bank?

INFLUENCE OF INTEREST RATES. When making banking decisions, why should you be concerned about current interest rates?

RISK-FREE RATE. What is a risk-free rate? Give an example of an investment with a risk-free rate. Why is there no risk?

RECONCILING YOUR ACCOUNT BALANCE. What does it mean to “reconcile your account balance?” Why is it important for you to regularly perform this task?

CALCULATING A RISK PREMIUM. What is a risk premium? How is the risk premium calculated?

INTEREST RATES. Where do financial institutions obtain funds for making loans? How are the interest rates for loans determined? Are the interest rates the same for all borrowers? Why or why not?

IMPACT OF INTEREST RATE MOVEMENTS. What effect would a general change in current interest rates have on you as a depositor or borrower?

TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES. What is the term structure of interest rates? Why is this concept important to an investor?

MONETARY POLICY. What is monetary policy? What organization controls monetary policy in the United States?

CHANGE IN INTEREST RATES. Briefly discuss conditions that can cause a shift in the demand for funds and a change in the interest rate.

IMPACT OF ECONOMY ON RISK PREMIUM. Explain why a weak economy may cause the risk premium to rise.

RISK PREMIUMS REQUIRED BY INVESTORS. Why is a high-risk premium an advantage for the investor? Why is a low-risk premium an advantage for an investor?

RISK PREMIUM ON A DEPOSIT. A local bank offers a deposit that earns 4% annual interest. The deposit is backed by the government if the bank fails. What is the risk premium of this deposit?

CHECK FLOAT. What is check float? How has check float changed due to electronic banking?

CASHIER’S CHECKS AND MONEY ORDERS. What is the difference between a cashier’s check and a money order?

PAYING BILLS ONLINE. List the advantages of paying your bills online.

RISK PREMIUM. What is the risk premium of Metallica Financial Company’s two-year interest rate of 12% given that your local FDIC-insured bank offers only a 5% return for two-year CDs? Why is Metallica offering a higher interest rate?

GOVERNMENT BORROWING AND INTEREST RATES. What is the likely impact of increased government borrowing on market rates of interest? [Assume all other factors such as the Fed’s monetary policy are held constant when answering this question.]

RISK AND RETURN. Why do some investors pursue higher-risk investments when their income falls during economic downturns? What is wrong with this strategy?

FEDERAL RESERVE AND LOWER INTEREST RATES. Why do interest rates decline when the Fed floods the banking system with more money?

FEDERAL RESERVE AND HIGHER INTEREST RATES. Why do interest rates increase when the Fed pulls money out of the banking system?

FEDERAL RESERVE AND LENDING ACTIVITY. Explain the relationship between the interest rate and the amount of funds that will be borrowed and spent.

FEDERAL RESERVE AND ECONOMIC STIMULUS. How can the Fed change interest rates in order to stimulate economic growth?

FEDERAL RESERVE AND COVID-19. How did the Federal Reserve respond to the COVID-19 pandemic?



