Chapter 10Purchasing and Financing a Home

Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock

Two years ago, Brian Menke purchased a small home that he could easily afford near the firm where he works. His coworker Tim Remington also bought a home. Unlike Brian, Tim needed most of his paycheck to cover the mortgage and expenses of his home, but he thought the purchase would be a good investment.

Because his mortgage payment was relatively low, Brian was able to save money during the next year. Tim, however, was unable to save any money, and when interest rates increased, his mortgage payment increased. Tim suddenly realized he could not afford his home. Because the demand for homes had weakened, housing prices had declined since Tim purchased his home. Tim sold his home, but for $20,000 less than he paid for it. He also had to pay the real estate agent a commission of $16,000. Thus, Tim received $36,000 less from the sale of his home than his purchase price in the previous year.

During the following year, the economy improved and home prices increased. Brian’s home was now worth $12,000 more than he had paid for it. But the improved economy did not help Tim, who no longer owned a home.

Financial planning made the difference. Brian’s strategy was more conservative, which allowed for the possibility that the economy and market conditions could weaken temporarily. Conversely, Tim did not consider that his mortgage payment could increase and also wrongly assumed that home prices would never decline.

Buying a home is an important personal financial decision due to the long-term and costly nature of the investment. Your decision on how much to spend and how much to finance will affect your cash flows for years. This chapter describes the fundamentals of purchasing a home and will help you evaluate a hypothetical home purchase.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Describe the factors that determine how much you can afford when buying a home.

Explain how to select a home to purchase.

Explain how to conduct a home valuation.

Describe the transaction costs of purchasing a home.

Describe the characteristics of a fixed-rate mortgage.

Describe the characteristics of an adjustable-rate mortgage.

Show how to compare the costs of purchasing a home versus renting.

Describe special types of mortgages.

Explain the mortgage refinancing decision.

Explain how a mortgage fits within your financial plan.
How Much Can You Afford?
The purchase of a home may be your most important personal finance decision, because it can have a major impact on your net worth over time. Good home purchase decisions may allow you to live in a comfortable environment and increase your wealth over time as your home’s market value increases. Furthermore, as you pay off the mortgage loan, you increase your equity investment in the home. However, because home prices can decline, bad home purchase decisions can be devastating and can even lead to bankruptcy. Recognizing the potential impact of the home purchase on your wealth can motivate you to learn about the process of buying and financing a home.

An alternative to purchasing a house is to purchase a condominium. Condominium owners own a unit of a housing complex but jointly own the surrounding land and common areas (such as parking lots) and amenities (such as a swimming pool). The benefits of a condominium are somewhat different from those of a house. Whereas a house is detached, units in a condominium are typically attached, so there is less privacy. Condominium expenses related to the common areas and amenities are shared among unit owners, but the owners of a house pay for all expenses on their own. Nevertheless, the factors to be considered when selecting or financing a house are also relevant when purchasing a condominium. Thus, the following discussion will use home rather than house to indicate that it also applies to a condominium.

Before you go shopping for a home, you first need to determine how much you can afford to spend on a home based on your financial situation. This can save you time because you can remove homes from consideration that are beyond what you can afford.

Most individuals pay for a home with a down payment (perhaps 10% to 20% of the purchase price) and obtain a mortgage loan to finance the rest. A mortgage loan is likely the biggest loan you will ever obtain in your lifetime. You will pay monthly mortgage payments over the life of the loan. The terms for mortgages vary. You will need to decide whether to obtain a fixed-rate or adjustable-rate mortgage and what the maturity of the mortgage should be. Traditionally, mortgages had a fixed interest rate and a maturity of 30 years, but today mortgages are available with maturities ranging from 15 to 40 years. Mortgage loan lenders determine how much money they will lend you based on your financial situation and credit history. Various websites can estimate the maximum value of a home you can afford based on your financial situation (such as your income and your net worth).

Financial planners suggest that a home price should be no more than 2.5 times the total gross annual household income and that monthly mortgage payments, including the mortgage, property taxes, and insurance, should not exceed 28% of gross monthly income. They also suggest that all the household’s monthly debt payments (including the mortgage) should be no more than about 40% of the total monthly gross income. However, these generalizations do not apply to everyone, as other financial information, such as the amount of savings accumulated and the spending habits of the homeowners, should also be considered.

Affordable Down Payment
You can determine your maximum down payment by estimating the market value of the assets that you are willing to convert to cash for a down payment and for transaction costs (such as closing costs) when obtaining a mortgage. Be sure to maintain some funds for liquidity purposes to cover unanticipated bills.

Affordable Monthly Mortgage Payments
How large a mortgage payment can you afford? Refer to your cash flow statement to determine how much net cash flow you have to make a mortgage payment. If you purchase a home, you will no longer have a rent payment, so that money can be used as part of the mortgage payment. You should also be aware, however, that owning a home entails some periodic expenses (such as property taxes, homeowner’s insurance, and home repairs). You should not plan to purchase a home that will absorb all your current excess cash inflows. The larger your mortgage payments, the less you can add to your savings or other investments.

Lessons Learned from Others’ Mistakes
PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance

Once some home buyers determine the maximum that they can afford, they tend to view that maximum as the amount that they should spend. But by spending the maximum, they may have no funds available for unanticipated expenses that could occur.

Another behavioral characteristic of home buyers is that they tend to buy a home for more money than they originally planned to spend. This occurs because as they start checking out homes for sale, they commonly notice a home with desirable features that is priced beyond the amount they had planned to spend. They may use the following reasoning to justify spending more than they had intended to purchase the house:

The more expensive house may not require any additional down payment if they just obtain a larger mortgage.

They can possibly obtain a second job to afford the higher mortgage payment.

They will benefit from buying the more expensive home because if prices rise over time, more expensive homes will likely rise in value by a greater degree.

Each of these reasons is questionable. First, the home buyers may be able to obtain a larger mortgage, but that means more debt, and they will need to make larger monthly mortgage payments. Second, obtaining an extra job just to afford a more expensive home might reduce the enjoyment of that home. Third, home values might rise over time, but they could also decline over time, and if the values drop, the more expensive homes will likely suffer a larger decline in value.
Like many purchasing decisions, buying a home provides immediate satisfaction, and the pain of paying for it is not felt until later. Therefore, home buyers can find many reasons to spend more money on a home than they can afford. By the time home buyers feel the pain from paying off the debt that was needed to make the initial purchase, it is too late to reverse their decision. Normally, home buyers cannot easily sell a home that they just purchased, and even if they could, the transaction costs (discussed later in this chapter) are substantial. Therefore, home buyers should carefully assess how much they can afford to spend on a home and should use that amount as a maximum when reviewing homes for sale.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

It has been two years since Stephanie Spratt graduated from college and started her full-time job (which was described in Chapter 1). About a year after graduation, she decided to purchase a new car (with the help of a car loan); this decision was described in Chapter 9. Since starting her job two years ago, Stephanie has accumulated about $10,000 in savings. Furthermore, she just received an unexpected bonus of $10,000 and a promotion from her employer. Her monthly cash inflows after taxes will now be about $3,500, or about $500 more than when she started her job. Over the same period, her monthly cash outflows have been quite stable, other than her car loan payment, which started when she purchased her car about a year ago. She decides that she now has sufficient funds and monthly net cash flow to consider purchasing a home. If she buys a home, she would no longer need to pay $1,000 per month rent for an apartment that she shares with a roommate. She begins to look at homes for sale in the range of $120,000 to $150,000. As a result of her bonus and her accumulated savings, she believes she can now afford to make a down payment of about $15,000. Once she identifies a home that she may want to purchase, she will obtain estimates of the required down payment, the transaction costs, and the mortgage payment.

ECONOMIC IMPACT

When you consider how much you can afford, consider the economic conditions and stability of your job situation. If economic conditions weaken, will your job be affected? Your mortgage payments extend for a long period of time, so you should assess the likelihood that you will continue to earn sufficient income each month over the life of the mortgage to make mortgage payments. Although you could obtain another job if you are laid off, you might not be able to earn the same level of income. Thus, you may want to use a conservative estimate of your future income when determining the mortgage payment you can afford, just to make sure that you can afford the home even if economic conditions deteriorate.
Selecting a Home
The process of selecting a home begins by determining the general area where you want to live. Next, evaluate the homes for sale in your target area to determine the typical price range and features. Once you decide on a realistic price range, identify a specific home that you desire. You can compare the cost of buying that home to the cost of renting. This way, you can weigh the extra costs against the benefits of home ownership.

Relying on a Real Estate Agent
You may consider advice from a real estate agent when you assess homes, decide whether to buy a home, or determine which home to purchase. Yet you should not rely completely on the advice of real estate agents because they have a vested interest: They earn a commission only if you purchase a home through them. You should consider their input, but make decisions that meet your needs and preferences. A good real estate agent will ask you about your preferences and suggest appropriate homes.

Using Online Realtor Services
Increasingly, online services are being used to facilitate home purchases. Websites such as www.coldwellbankerhomes.com allow sellers to present detailed information about their home in a database that is accessible to potential home buyers. These types of websites are sometimes limited to particular cities. The realty company sponsoring the website may provide services to complete a contract, and the commission for using the online service is less than the traditional commission charged by real estate agents.

Other online services allow sellers to list their home in a database without providing other real estate–related services. The contract is completed by the buyer and seller without the help of a real estate agent. The advantage of this type of service is that it charges lower commissions than a traditional full-service real estate company. Some of these online services are subsidiaries of full-service real estate companies.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
The Financial Calculators section of www.calculatorweb.com.

To get
An estimate of how much money you could borrow to finance a home, based on your income and other financial information.

Criteria Used to Select a Home
Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
The Recent Home Sales section of www.zillow.com.

To get
Sales prices of recently purchased homes on a street in a city that you specify over a recent period. It can also provide a list of homes that were sold in the city you specify within a certain price range that you specify.

The following list identifies the most important factors to consider when selecting a home.

HOME PRICE RELATIVE TO YOUR BUDGET. Stay within your budget. Avoid purchasing a home that you cannot afford. Although your favorite home may have expensive new appliances and a large yard, it may not be worth the stress of struggling to make the mortgage payments.

If you have a poor credit rating, you should think carefully before purchasing a home. Even if you can obtain a mortgage, you might be better off paying down the debts that have caused you to have a poor credit rating so that you will be able to lock in a lower mortgage loan rate later. After you have paid off your debts and saved enough to make a larger down payment, then you can consider purchasing a home.

CONVENIENT LOCATION. Focus on homes in a convenient area so that you can minimize commuting time to work or travel time to other activities. You may save 10 or more hours of travel time a week as well as saving on gasoline costs.

MAINTENANCE. Some homes built by well-known construction companies have lower repair bills than others. In addition, newer homes tend to need fewer repairs than older homes. A home with a large yard requires more maintenance.

In condominiums, residents share common areas, such as a swimming pool or tennis court. Normally, the residents pay a fixed monthly fee to cover the costs of maintaining the common areas. In addition, they may be assessed an extra fee to maintain the structure of the condominium, such as a new roof or other repairs.

SCHOOL SYSTEM. If you have children, the reputation of the school system is very important. Even if you do not have children, the resale value of your house benefits from a good school system.

INSURANCE. When you own a home, you need to purchase homeowner’s insurance, which covers the home in case of burglary or damage. The cost of insurance varies among homes. It is higher for more expensive homes and for homes in high-risk areas (such as flood zones) because the likelihood of damage to the home is higher.

PROPERTY TAXES. Property taxes are imposed on homes to pay for local services, such as the local school system and the local park system. Taxes vary substantially among locations. Annual property taxes are often between 1% and 2% of the market value of the home.

HOMEOWNER’S ASSOCIATION. Some homes are connected with a homeowner’s association (HOA), which sets guidelines for the homes and may even assess fees that are used to hire security guards or to maintain common grounds within the area. The monthly fees charged by some homeowner’s associations are very high and should be considered when buying a home.

RESALE VALUE. The resale value of a home is highly dependent on its location. While most homes with similar features within a specific subdivision or neighborhood are in the same price range, prices can vary substantially among those homes. For example, homes in a subdivision that are within walking distance of a school may be worth more than comparable houses several miles from the school.

You cannot perfectly predict the future resale value of a home, but you can evaluate today’s resale value of similar homes in that location that were sold years ago. Information about home prices is provided on numerous websites. Be aware, however, that the rate of increase in home prices in previous years does not necessarily serve as a good predictor of the future.

Keep in mind that when you use a real estate agent to sell a home (as most people do), you will pay the agent a commission that is usually about 6% of the selling price. Thus, if you resell your home for $100,000, you will probably pay a commission of about $6,000 and therefore receive $94,000. The buyer of a home does not pay a commission.

PERSONAL PREFERENCES. In addition to the general criteria just described, you will have your own personal preferences regarding features such as the number of bedrooms, the size of the kitchen, and the size of the yard.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Searching for a Home
Application
The Real Estate by Zillow app (by Zillow.com) allows you to review homes for sale at your present location and displays photos of homes, sales prices, and other details. You can also review homes for sale in other remote locations that you identify.

To Find It
Search for the Zillow app on your mobile device.
Valuation of a Home
The valuations of homes are determined in the marketplace of homes, based on the demand for homes by potential homeowners versus the supply of homes for sale by existing homeowners. When the demand for homes is high relative to the number of homes for sale, the valuations (as measured by market prices) rise. Conversely, if the demand is weak while the supply of homes for sale is large, the valuations of homes decline. Demand and supply for homes are influenced by economic conditions, as explained next.

Economic Impact on Home Values
When economic conditions improve, people are more confident that their income will be stable or may even grow over time, so they are more willing to purchase homes. As the demand for homes increases, the prices of homes rise. Conversely, when economic conditions weaken, people become more concerned that their income might be eliminated (due to layoffs) or reduced over time. They are less willing to purchase homes, and the decline in demand for homes causes the prices of homes to decline.

ECONOMIC IMPACT

The impact of the economy on home prices is illustrated in Exhibit 10.1. The initial momentum comes from the higher income levels during a strong economy, which can encourage some renters to purchase homes. In addition, a strong economy makes people feel more confident that their jobs are secure and that they will be able to afford mortgage payments over a long period of time. It is also easier for buyers to obtain financing in a strong economy because financial institutions are more willing to provide mortgage loans, as they are more confident that the borrowers will earn sufficient income to repay their mortgage loans. The strong desire to purchase homes causes the total demand for homes to exceed the number of homes that are for sale, which places upward pressure on home prices.

Exhibit 10.1 Impact of Economic Conditions on Home Values

Figure 10.1 Full Alternative Text
Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.realtor.com

To get
A listing of homes for sale in an area that you specify and homes in the price and size range that you specify.

During a weak economy, the opposite effects occur. The initial momentum comes from the lower income levels during a weak economy, which causes people to spend their money more conservatively. Renters may not consider purchasing homes under these conditions, as layoffs commonly occur when the economy is weak. Because their jobs are not secure, they are less confident that they could afford mortgage payments over a long period of time. Financial institutions are less willing to provide mortgage loans, as they are less confident that the borrowers will earn sufficient income to repay their mortgage loans over time. Some homeowners need to sell their homes because their income has been reduced or because they were laid off.

Impact of the Financial Crisis on Home Values
During 2003–2006, economic conditions were strong and home builders were constructing many new homes. Mortgage lenders were aggressively attempting to find buyers for these homes because they make profits from their loans (assuming that the borrowers repay their loans). Some mortgage lenders were providing subprime mortgages, which are mortgage loans to borrowers without sufficient income or down payment to qualify for prime mortgages. Mortgage lenders were willing to provide these mortgages because they could charge a higher interest rate and additional upfront fees to compensate for the higher level of risk. If the borrowers defaulted on the mortgage loans, the mortgage lender could take ownership of the homes. Mortgage lenders were optimistic that home prices would rise, or at least not decline, and therefore that the homes would serve as effective collateral if a borrower defaulted on the loan.

ECONOMIC IMPACT

Mortgage Defaults
In the 2007–2008 period, interest rates increased, which increased the mortgage payments required of many homeowners. Consequently, some homeowners could no longer afford to make their mortgage payments on time. By January 2009, about 10% of all homeowners were late on their mortgage payments or had defaulted on their loans. About 25% of all outstanding subprime mortgages had late payments of at least 30 days. Many financial institutions were involved in providing these mortgage loans, and they experienced large losses or even bankruptcy. These conditions resulted in the financial crisis of 2008–2009.

Impact on Home Prices
Many homeowners who could not afford the homes they were living in were trying to sell their homes. In some cases, the lenders who provided the mortgages repossessed the homes because the homeowners were no longer making their mortgage payments. These lenders, however, were also struggling to sell the homes that they had repossessed. These conditions caused home prices to decline substantially. In some areas, home prices declined by more than 50%.

This slower real estate market caused a decline in home-building activity, which decreased the demand for many related businesses, such as plumbing, air conditioning, roofing, and landscaping. Consequently, many people who worked in these businesses lost their jobs, which further weakened the economy.

Resolving the Crisis
In an effort to stimulate the market for homes and mortgages, the U.S. Congress passed the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008, which allowed some homeowners to avoid foreclosure. Some financial institutions participated in a voluntary program in which they worked with homeowners who were at risk of foreclosure. They refinanced the mortgages in a manner that made the payments more affordable to homeowners.

In some cases, financial institutions accepted a “short sale” arrangement—the proceeds of the sale of the home were short of the balance of the debt owed on the mortgage, and the seller of the home was unable to pay the difference to the lender. That is, the lending institution did not receive the balance of the mortgage loan that it had provided. Nevertheless, some lenders were willing to accept short sale arrangements because the alternative might have been foreclosure, in which the lender would have to reclaim the home and sell it.

Lessons from the Crisis
There were four main lessons we can take from the financial crisis. First, and most broadly, the financial crisis illustrated how granting mortgages to unqualified mortgage applicants could ultimately hurt the mortgage market. Second, it illuminated the risk of owning a home, as real estate prices can decline substantially under some conditions. Third, it showed how economic conditions have a strong impact on the demand for homes and therefore on the prices of homes. Fourth, it demonstrated how housing conditions have a strong impact on the economy because so many jobs are connected to the construction of new homes.

Correcting the Mortgage Application Process
The government implemented he Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 to stabilize the mortgage markets. One of the provisions of the act requires that financial institutions granting mortgages verify the income, job status, and credit history of mortgage applicants before approving mortgage applications. This provision is to ensure that mortgage applicants show proof that they qualify for a mortgage before a mortgage loan is granted.

In 2014, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) issued new rules to strengthen the provisions of the 2010 act. The rules define a new class of mortgages called qualified mortgages, which are designed to be safer and easier for potential home buyers to understand than many of the loans extended before the financial crisis.

Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Home Values
During the COVID-19 pandemic, many stores and restaurants closed for several months. Many people lost their jobs, and their income level declined. Furthermore, many people who did not lose their jobs were concerned about job stability because of the potential effects of the pandemic on the economy. The housing market initially became inactive because of health concerns about people interacting to buy or sell homes. These concerns were alleviated over time. In 2020 and 2021, the Federal Reserve lowered interest rates, which caused a major decline in the 30-year mortgage rates, and monthly mortgage payments declined in response. Consequently, the monthly payments to be made on a given mortgage size were often reduced by $300 or more as a result of the reduced mortgage rates. This caused a very strong demand for existing homes and new homes, whereby potential buyers were willing to substantially overbid the seller’s asking price to outbid other potential homeowners. This unusual activity resulted in a large increase in home values. In 2022 and 2023, interest rates increased, which reduced the excessive demand for homes and allowed the housing market some stability.

Market Analysis
Potential home buyers can conduct a market analysis of any particular home by assessing the values of other homes with similar features that were recently sold in the same location. One popular method of estimating the market value of a home is to measure the price per square foot of other homes that recently sold with similar features as the home to be valued. Then the valuation is derived by multiplying the number of square feet in that home by the average price per square foot of other homes in the area with similar features.

Real estate agents or appraisers may also provide a valuation, but they probably use this method as part of their process. They might then make some adjustments according to other favorable or unfavorable features of the home compared to other homes in the area, but the method described here can be used as a starting point.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt has identified a house that she is interested in purchasing. She finds the selling prices of three other homes that were just sold in the same area with a similar lot size and about the same age as the home that she is considering. The purchase prices are shown in the second column of Exhibit 10.2.

Exhibit 10.2 Using a Market Analysis to Value a Home

Figure 10.2 Full Alternative Text
She recognizes that homes in an area vary in price due to their size. She determines the price per square foot by dividing each home’s price by the square feet, as shown in the third column. Then she determines that the average price per square foot of the three homes is $100, as shown at the bottom of the exhibit. Because the home that Stephanie wants to purchase has 1,500 square feet, she estimates its market value to be:

Market Value of Home
=
Average Price per Square Foot
×
Square Feet of Home
=
$
100
×
1,500
=
$
150,000
She estimates the price of this home at $150,000. This initial analysis gives her some insight into what the home is worth. After considering other factors as well, Stephanie decides that she would be willing to purchase the home for $145,000 and plans to make an offer of $145,000 on the home. But before negotiating the price with the seller, she needs to determine the costs that she would incur due to purchasing the home.

Obtaining a Second Opinion on Your Valuation
If your valuation leads you to believe that a particular home is undervalued, you may want to get a second opinion before you try to purchase that home. If you are using a real estate agent to help you find a home, that agent may conduct a valuation of the home and offer suggestions about the price that you should be willing to offer. Be aware, however, that although agents are experienced at valuing homes, some agents provide a valuation that is intended to serve the seller rather than the buyer. That is, they may overestimate the value so that potential buyers are convinced that the home is worth buying. In this way, the agents can ensure that a home will sell and that they will receive a commission. Although many real estate agents are honest and will provide an unbiased estimate, you should always conduct your own valuation and carefully assess the agent’s valuation. Negotiating a Price
Once you have finished your valuation and are convinced that you should buy a particular home, you need to negotiate a price with the seller of the home by making an offer. Some homes are initially priced above the price that the seller will accept. As with any investment, you want to make sure that you do not overpay for a home.

Some sellers are willing to accept less than their original asking price. Once you decide on an offering price, you can submit an offer in the form of a contract to buy the home. Your real estate agent takes the contract to the seller and serves as the intermediary between you and the seller during the negotiation process.

The seller may accept your offer, reject it, or make a counteroffer. If the asking price is $100,000 and you offer $90,000, the seller may reject that offer but make a counteroffer of, say, $96,000. Then the decision reverts to you. You can agree, reject that offer, or revise the contract again. For example, you may counter by offering $94,000. The contract negotiation can go back and forth until the buyer and seller either come to an agreement or decide that it is no longer worthwhile to pursue a possible agreement. The contract stipulates not only the price but also other conditions that are requested by the buyer, such as repairs to be completed by the seller and the date when the buyer will be able to move into the home.

An offer is commonly contingent on an inspection of the home. You should always have the home inspected, even if it is a newly constructed house. The inspector will determine the condition of the plumbing; the electrical, cooling, and heating systems; the roof and any siding; and other aspects of the house. An inspection for termites and other pests may also be needed. If the inspection discovers major problems, you may want to withdraw your offer or negotiate a lower price to enable you to pay for repairs. Mortgage lenders may require a certificate of inspection before they will extend a loan.  Transaction Costs of Purchasing a Home
Once you have started the offer process, you should begin applying for a mortgage from a financial institution, or you may even start this process before making the offer so that you are sure that the financing will be available. The loan application process requires that you summarize your financial condition, including your income, your assets, and your liabilities. You will need to provide proof of income, such as recent paycheck stubs and bank statements. The lender will check your financial condition by contacting your employer to verify your employment and to learn your present salary.

In addition to applying for a mortgage, you will need to plan to cover the transaction costs of purchasing the home. These include the down payment and closing costs.

Prequalification and Preapproval for a Mortgage
You may find it useful to be prequalified or preapproved for a mortgage before you even begin searching for a home. Generally, prequalification refers to a more informal process than preapproval, although some lenders use the terms interchangeably. To be prequalified for a mortgage, you contact a financial institution in person, by telephone, or online and describe your income, assets, and liabilities. The lender will tell you approximately how large a mortgage you might qualify for, but the lender does not check your financial condition and does not promise that you will be approved for a mortgage of that amount. Nevertheless, if you are uncertain about how much you can afford to spend on a home, prequalification can help you make that decision.

For preapproval, you provide all the documentation that is required to apply for a mortgage loan, and the financial institution will review it and check your credit report. The process may take two to four weeks, and the lender may charge an application fee. If you are preapproved for a mortgage, the lender will give you a letter stating the amount it is willing to lend. The offer of a loan is good for a specific period, often 90 days. Getting preapproval for a mortgage can be advantageous, especially in a period when homes are in great demand. Not only will you know exactly what size mortgage you can obtain, but if you make an offer on a home on which there are several other offers, the seller may prefer your offer because there will be no waiting to see if a potential buyer qualifies for a mortgage. In addition, the lender may be willing to lock in the interest rate that it will charge, which can be beneficial if you anticipate that interest rates may increase soon. Going through the preapproval process also enables you to learn if there are any problems with your credit report or credit history and thus allows you to take steps to solve the problems before you make an offer on a home.

Down Payment
When you purchase a home, you use your own money to make a down payment and pay the remaining amount owed with financing. Your down payment represents your equity investment in the home.

For a conventional mortgage, a lender typically requires a down payment of 10% to 20% of the home’s selling price. The lender expects you to cover a portion of the purchase price with your own money because the home serves as collateral to back the loan. The lending institution bears the risk that you may default on the loan. If you are unable to make your mortgage payments, the lender can take ownership of the home and sell it to obtain the funds that you owe.

If the home’s value declines over time, however, a creditor may not obtain all the funds that it initially lent. Your down payment provides a cushion in case the value of the home declines. The lender could sell the home for less than the original purchase price and still recover the entire mortgage loan.

With government-backed loans, a traditional lender extends the loan, but the government insures it in the event of default. Government-backed mortgages may allow lower down payments and may even specify lower interest rates than conventional mortgages. Government-backed mortgages are often backed by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) or the Veterans Administration (VA). To qualify for federally insured mortgages, borrowers must satisfy various requirements imposed by the guarantors. FHA loans enable low- or middle-income individuals to obtain mortgage financing. VA loans are extended to military veterans.

The FHA will guarantee loans where the borrower makes a down payment as small as 3.5% of the purchase price. It also will guarantee loans where the borrower has a FICO score lower than 580, although a larger down payment is required. Without the FHA guarantee, a lender would probably require a FICO score of at least 620, depending on the borrower’s other characteristics and the amount to be borrowed.

If you obtain an FHA or VA loan, you will need to maintain an escrow account. Your monthly mortgage payment will include an additional payment for your home insurance and your property taxes. Thus, you would not need to make one large annual payment for home insurance or property taxes, because your mortgage payments during the year will cover the amounts you owe.

Mortgage Insurance
If your down payment is less than 20% of the selling price of the home you are buying, the lender will very likely require you to purchase mortgage insurance, which insures the lender if the borrower (homeowner) does not repay the loan. Thus, mortgage insurance protects the lender, not the borrower. If you are obtaining a non-FHA mortgage from a financial institution, the insurance will be provided by a private company and thus is known as private mortgage insurance (PMI). The FHA always requires mortgage insurance, provided by the government, for loans that it guarantees when the down payment is less than 20%. The cost of the mortgage insurance depends on the size of the mortgage loan relative to the value of the home.

Closing Costs
A borrower incurs various fees in the mortgage loan application process. These fees are often referred to as closing costs. The most important fees are identified here. Under the CFPB’s rules, a loan over $100,000 cannot be a qualified mortgage if the fees associate with it exceed 3% of the loan amount.

Loan Application Fee
When applying for a mortgage loan, you may be charged an application fee by the lender. The fee typically ranges from $100 to $500.

Points
Lenders sometimes charge a fee commonly referred to as discount points or points to reduce the interest rate on a loan. The more points you pay, the lower the interest rate on the loan. Points are stated as a percentage of the loan amount. If you are charged one point when you obtain a mortgage for $150,000, a fee of $1,500 (computed as 
1
%
×
$
150,000
) is charged at the time the loan is granted. Points may be tax deductible. Lenders do not always charge points, so you should shop around to see if you can find a lender who will offer you a similar interest rate without charging points.

points
A fee charged by the lender to reduce the interest rate when a mortgage loan is provided; stated as a percentage of the mortgage loan amount.

Loan Origination Fee
Lenders may also charge a loan origination fee, which is often between 0.5% and 1.0% of the mortgage loan. Many lenders allow homeowners to select among different fee structures, so you may be able to pay a lower loan origination fee if you accept a slightly higher interest rate. Some lenders may not charge an origination fee, but they charge a higher interest rate on the mortgage instead.

Appraisal Fee
An appraisal is used to estimate the market value of the home and thus protects the financial institution’s interests. If you are unable to make your monthly payments, the financial institution can sell the home to recoup the mortgage loan that it provided. The appraisal fee commonly ranges between $300 and $500.

ATTORNEY FEE. The borrower who is purchasing the home hires an attorney to review the sales contract on the home to ensure that the wording of the contract is reasonable. Realtors may have a list of attorneys that specialize in this type of work.

INSPECTION FEE. The borrower who is purchasing the home hires a licensed inspector to assess the current condition of the home.

Title Search and Insurance
An agreement to purchase a home from a current owner (as opposed to a new home from a developer) typically involves various transaction costs for a title search and insurance. A title search is conducted by the mortgage company to ensure that the home or property is owned by the seller. Title insurance provides you with protection if individuals other than the seller show evidence that they hold the actual deed of ownership to the property. It also protects you if there are liabilities attached to the home that were not discovered during the title search. The fee for title insurance is commonly between 0.4% and 1.0% of the value of the home.

Both the closing costs and the down payment are due at the time of the closing. Closing costs can be added to the mortgage amount. During the closing, the title for the home is transferred to the buyer, the seller is paid in full, and the buyer takes possession of the home.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Recall that Stephanie Spratt is considering making an offer of $145,000 on a house. She wants to determine the transaction costs. She is planning to make a down payment of $15,000 and borrow $130,000. She called York Financial Institution for information about obtaining a mortgage loan. She learned that if she applied for a $130,000 mortgage, she would have to pay the following:

one point, which equals $1,300 (computed as 
1
%
×
$
130,000
)

$700 origination fee

$300 for an appraisal

$200 application fee

$500 attorney fee

$300 inspection fee

$500 for a title search and title insurance 
$200 for other fees

York’s offer also acknowledges that it is willing to cover the private mortgage insurance payments.

Based on the details given here, Stephanie would incur the following closing costs:

Points	(1% of mortgage)	$1,300
Origination Fee	 	700
Appraisal Fee	 	300
Application Fee	 	200
Attorney Fee	 	500
Inspection Fee	 	300
Title Search and Insurance	 	500
Other Fees	 	200
Total	 	$4,000
Stephanie will need a down payment of $15,000 and $4,000 in closing costs to purchase the home.
Financing with Fixed-Rate Mortgages
A fixed-rate mortgage specifies a fixed interest rate that is constant for the life of the mortgage. When homeowners expect that interest rates will rise, they tend to prefer fixed-rate mortgages because their mortgage payments will be sheltered from the rising market interest rates. Many other types of mortgages are available, but the traditional 30-year fixed-rate mortgage is still popular. The interest rate charged on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages is typically related to other long-term interest rates (such as the 30-year Treasury bond rate) at the time that the mortgage is created. You can access various websites to obtain a general summary of prevailing mortgage rates, but rates vary among financial institutions. If you sell a home before the mortgage is paid off, you can use a portion of the proceeds from selling the home to pay off the mortgage.

fixed-rate mortgage
A mortgage in which a fixed interest rate is specified until maturity.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
The Finance section of www.bankrate.com and click on Home Mortgage.

To get
A sampling of prevailing mortgage rates offered by some financial institutions.

Amortization Table
Your monthly mortgage payment for a fixed-rate mortgage is based on an amortization schedule. This schedule discloses the monthly payment that you will make, based on a specific mortgage amount, a fixed interest rate, and a maturity.

Allocation of the Mortgage Payment
Each monthly mortgage payment represents a partial equity payment that pays a portion of the principal of the loan and an interest payment.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt decides to review mortgage websites to estimate her monthly mortgage payments if she obtains a $130,000 mortgage to purchase a home. One website asks her to input the mortgage amount she desires and the interest rate that she expects to pay on a 30-year mortgage. She inputs $130,000 as the mortgage amount and 5% as the interest rate. The website then provides her with an amortization schedule, which is summarized in Exhibit 10.3. This exhibit shows that her monthly payment would be $698. It also shows how her mortgage payments would be allocated to paying off principal (equity) versus interest. Notice how the initial payments are allocated mostly to interest, with a relatively small amount used to pay off the principal. For example, for month two, $157 of her payment is applied to the principal, while $541 goes to pay the interest expense. Initially, when the amount of the loan principal is large, most of her payment is needed to cover the interest owed. Exhibit 10.3 shows that as time passes, the proportion of the payment allocated to equity increases.
Exhibit 10.3 Amortization Schedule for a 30-Year (360-Month) Fixed-Rate Mortgage for $130,000 at a 5% Interest Rate

NOTE: Numbers are rounded to the nearest dollar.

Figure 10.3 Full Alternative Text
Notice, too, that Stephanie’s mortgage balance after 25 months would be $125,893. This means that Stephanie would have paid off only $4,107 of the $130,000 balance after 25 months. After 200 months, her mortgage balance would be $81,377. This point is beyond half the life of the mortgage (which has a total life of 360 months), yet she would have paid off only 37% of the original mortgage amount.

The amount of Stephanie’s annual mortgage payments that would be allocated to paying off the principal versus interest is shown in Exhibit 10.4. In the first year, she would pay off only $1,918 of the principal, while the rest of her mortgage payments ($6,456) in the first year would be used to pay interest. This information is surprising to Stephanie, so she reviews the mortgage situation further to determine if it is possible to build equity in the home more quickly.
Exhibit 10.4 Allocation of Principal versus Interest Paid per Year on a $130,000 30-Year Mortgage

NOTE: Numbers are rounded to the nearest dollar.

Figure 10.4 Full Alternative Text
When the COVID-19 pandemic reached the United States, some mortgage lenders allowed homeowners to defer their mortgage payments for a period such as three to six months, without penalty. Such policies were intended to help homeowners whose financial condition was severely affected by the coronavirus pandemic.

Impact of the Mortgage Amount on the Monthly Payment
The larger the mortgage amount, the larger your monthly payments will be for a given interest rate and maturity. Exhibit 10.5 shows the monthly payment based on a 30-year mortgage and a 5% interest rate for different mortgage amounts. Notice the change in the mortgage payment for larger mortgage amounts. For example, the monthly mortgage payment for an $80,000 mortgage is $429, while the monthly payment for a $120,000 mortgage is $644.

Exhibit 10.5 Monthly Mortgage Payments Based on Different Mortgage Amounts (30-Year Fixed-Rate Mortgage; 5% Interest Rate)

Figure 10.5 Full Alternative Text
Impact of the Interest Rate on the Monthly Payment
Given the large amount of funds that you may borrow to finance a home, you should make every effort to obtain a mortgage loan that has a low interest rate. The lower the interest rate on the mortgage, the smaller the monthly mortgage payment. Even a slight increase (such as 0.5%) in the interest rate increases your monthly mortgage payment.
How the COVID-19 Pandemic Affected Interest Rates
During the COVID-19 pandemic, many people lost their jobs, and the economy weakened. The Federal Reserve responded by implementing a monetary policy to reduce market interest rates (as explained in Chapter 6). A primary goal of the Fed was to reduce the cost of housing to potential homeowners, which could increase demand for homes and stimulate the economy.

During 2020 and 2021, one result of the Fed’s actions was that the 30-year fixed rate mortgage rate declined to about 3%. To appreciate the impact of such a low rate, reconsider the previous example in which a $130,000 mortgage with a 30-year mortgage rate of 5% requires a monthly payment of $698. During the COVID-19 pandemic, this same mortgage would have required a monthly payment of $548, which is $150 per month lower. For larger mortgages, the monthly savings was even more. Thus, even if the purchase price of a home had not changed, the required monthly payments on mortgages declined substantially. As a result of the low mortgage rates, there was a large increase in the demand for existing homes and new homes, which stimulated the economy.

In 2022, the Fed was concerned that the strong economy would possibly lead to high inflation, and it reversed its monetary policy to raise interest rates. By 2023, the 30-year mortgage rate had risen to 6%, which required a monthly payment of $780 on the $130,000 mortgage. However, those homeowners who locked in the 30-year mortgage rate of 3% in 2020 and 2021 were insulated from the rising interest rates.

Impact of the Mortgage Maturity on the Monthly Payment
The maturity of the mortgage indicates how long it will take to complete your financing payments and pay off the mortgage. At that point, you own the home outright. The 15-year mortgage has become very popular as an alternative to the 30-year mortgage. The advantage of a 15-year mortgage is that you will have paid off your mortgage after 15 years, whereas a 30-year mortgage requires payments for an additional 15 years. Monthly payments on a 15-year mortgage are typically higher, but you pay less interest over the life of the loan and build equity at a faster pace. By building equity faster, you may also be able to terminate the monthly premiums for mortgage insurance more quickly.

The advantage of a 30-year mortgage is that you have smaller monthly payments for a given mortgage loan amount than you would for a 15-year mortgage. The monthly payments may be more affordable, and you may have more liquidity. In some areas where homes are very expensive, lenders offer mortgages longer than 30 years because many buyers cannot afford the monthly payments on shorter mortgages. A mortgage longer than 30 years cannot be a qualified mortgage, however.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.bankrate.com/mortgages/mortgage-rates/

To get
Interest rates for mortgages of various maturities.

Estimating the Monthly Mortgage Payment
You can use mortgage loan websites to obtain estimates of your monthly payments based on a specific mortgage amount and maturity.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt wants to estimate her monthly mortgage payment on a $130,000 fixed-rate mortgage for 15- and 30-year maturities, as shown in Exhibit 10.6. At an interest rate of 5%, the monthly payment on the 30-year mortgage would be $698. The 15-year mortgage requires a monthly payment of $1,028, which is $330 more than the $698 payment on the 30-year mortgage. This is the obvious disadvantage of a 15-year mortgage. Yet this monthly payment would be only $28 more than Stephanie presently pays for her share of the apartment rent, and the rent might be increased over time.
Exhibit 10.6 Comparison of Monthly Payments for a 30-Year versus a 15-Year Mortgage of $130,000 Based on Different Interest Rates

NOTE: Payments are rounded to the nearest dollar.

Figure 10.6 Full Alternative Text
The advantage of the 15-year mortgage is that she would pay down the mortgage sooner, meaning that she would accumulate a larger equity investment in the home more quickly. To gain more insight into this advantage, she reviews a website to compare the remaining loan balance for each of the two mortgage maturities on a year-by-year basis. This comparison is summarized in Exhibit 10.7. Notice that after six years, she would still owe $116,916 on the 30-year mortgage versus $89,260 on the 15-year mortgage. At that point, she would owe $27,656 more on the 30-year mortgage than she would on the 15-year mortgage. After 10 years, she would owe more than $51,000 more on the 30-year mortgage than on the 15-year mortgage. After 15 years, she would still owe more than $88,000 on the 30-year mortgage (which represents about two-thirds of the original $130,000 loan), while the 15-year mortgage would be paid off.

Exhibit 10.7 Comparison of Mortgage Balance for a 30-Year versus a 15-Year Mortgage ($130,000 Initial Mortgage Amount; 5% Interest Rate)

NOTE: Balances are rounded to the nearest dollar.

Figure 10.7 Full Alternative Text
The website also shows the total payments over the life of the mortgage for both types of mortgages if the mortgage is not paid off until maturity. 	Thirty-Year Mortgage	Fifteen-Year Mortgage
Total Principal Payments	$130,000	$130,000
Total Interest Payments	121,231	55,045
Total Payments	$251,231	$185,045
Stephanie would pay about $66,000 more in interest with the 30-year mortgage than with the 15-year mortgage. The total payments on the 30-year mortgage are much larger than the total payments that would be made over the life of the 15-year mortgage.

Stephanie recognizes that she would not be able to save as much money per month with the 15-year mortgage because her monthly mortgage payment would be higher. However, much of that extra payment is paying down her mortgage and therefore is building her equity investment in the home. Weighing the advantages of the 15-year mortgage against the disadvantage of paying the extra $330 per month, Stephanie decides on the 15-year mortgage. If she stays in the home, she will have no mortgage debt in 15 years. Even if she decides to sell this home before she pays off the 15-year mortgage, she will have paid down a larger amount of the mortgage. Because she will have a larger equity investment (from paying off more of the principal) with the 15-year mortgage, she will increase her net worth to a greater degree.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Generating an Amortization Schedule
Application
The Mortgage by Zillow app (by Zillow.com) allows you to input information such as the price of a home and mortgage interest rate so that you can generate an amortization schedule. This schedule shows the monthly payment, the proportion of payment representing interest, and the balance remaining on the mortgage loan.

To Find It
Search for the Mortgage by Zillow app on your mobile device
Financing with Adjustable-Rate Mortgages
An alternative to a fixed-rate mortgage is an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM), in which the interest owed changes in response to changes in a specific market-determined interest rate. An ARM is sometimes referred to as a variable-rate mortgage. ARMs should be considered along with fixed-rate mortgages. Like a fixed-rate mortgage, an ARM can be obtained for a 15-year or a 30-year maturity. ARMs have various characteristics that must be stated in the mortgage contract.

adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM)
A mortgage where the interest owed changes in response to changes in a specific market-determined interest rate.

The advantage of an adjustable-rate mortgage is that the interest rate you pay on your mortgage declines when market interest rates decline. This reduces your monthly mortgage payment so that you have more money to spend or to invest. The disadvantage of an adjustable-rate mortgage is that the interest rate you pay on your mortgage increases when market interest rates increase. This increases your monthly mortgage payment so that you have less money to spend or invest. In fact, some homeowners have defaulted on their loans when interest rates increased because they could not afford to pay the higher monthly payment.

Initial Rate
Many ARMs specify a relatively low initial mortgage rate over the first year or so. This initial rate is beneficial to homeowners in that it results in a low monthly mortgage payment over the first year. Recognize, however, that this rate is only temporary, as the mortgage rate will be adjusted. Under the CFPB’s rules, in determining the borrower’s ability to repay the loan, the lender will generally have to consider the payment due based on the highest interest rate that could be charged under the mortgage contract.

Interest Rate Index
The initial mortgage rate will be adjusted after a period (such as one year) in line with a specified interest rate index. The interest rate index to which the mortgage rate is tied must be included in the mortgage contract. Many ARMs use a rate that is tied to the average cost of deposits of financial institutions. For example, the interest rate charged on an ARM might be set at three percentage points above that benchmark. Thus, if the benchmark is 4% in a given year, the ARM will apply an interest rate of 7% (computed as 
4
%
+
3
%
). If the interest rate index has risen to 5% by the time of the next mortgage rate adjustment, the new mortgage rate will be 8% (computed as 
5
%
+
3
%
).

Frequency of Rate Adjustments
The mortgage contract also specifies how frequently the mortgage rate will be adjusted. Some ARMs specify that the rate will be adjusted once a year. Thus, the mortgage rate is set based on the specified interest rate index and then remains the same for the next 12 months. This means that the monthly payments will be constant for the next 12 months. At the end of the 12-month period, the mortgage rate is revised based on the prevailing interest rate index and is held constant for the following 12 months.

Some ARMs allow for less frequent adjustments, such as every three years or every five years. Others allow a single adjustment at the end of the fifth year, and the adjusted rate is then held constant over the next 25 years of a 30-year mortgage. Before an ARM adjusts, the CFPB requires the lender to give the borrower sufficient notice so that the borrower can attempt to refinance with another more desirable mortgage.

Other ARMs offer the following alternatives:

An interest rate that is fixed for the first three years, but converts to an ARM (and adjusts annually) after three years

An interest rate that is fixed for the first five years, but converts to an ARM (and adjusts annually) after five years

An interest rate that adjusts for the first five years and then is fixed (based on an interest rate index at that time) for the next 25 years

With so many alternatives available, you can easily find a mortgage that fits your preferences. For example, if you expect that interest rates will decline consistently over time, you may prefer an ARM that is adjusted every year. If your expectations are correct, your mortgage rate will decline over time with the decline in market interest rates. However, accurately forecasting the direction of interest rates is difficult, which means that your future mortgage payments are uncertain. When considering a particular adjustable-rate mortgage, you should estimate what the monthly payments would be under the adverse conditions in which market rates rise substantially over time. Make sure that you can afford the monthly payments if interest rates increase.

Caps on Adjustable-Rate Mortgages
The adjustable-rate mortgage contract also typically specifies caps, or a maximum and minimum fluctuation in the interest rate. For example, an ARM may have a cap of 2% per year, which prevents the mortgage rate from being adjusted upward by more than two percentage points from its existing level each year. Assume the market interest rate increases by three percentage points from one year to the next. Without a cap, the mortgage rate on the ARM would increase by three percentage points. With a 2% cap, however, only an increase of two percentage points is allowed in that year. This cap is useful because it limits the potential increase in the mortgage payments that may result from an increase in interest rates.
caps
Maximum and minimum fluctuations in the interest rate on an adjustable-rate mortgage.

In addition to a cap on the annual increase in the mortgage rate, there is usually a lifetime cap, which represents the maximum amount of the increase in the mortgage rate over the life of the mortgage. A lifetime cap of 5% is commonly used. Thus, if an ARM has an initial mortgage rate of 7% and a 5% cap, the maximum mortgage rate over the life of the mortgage would be 12%.

Financing with a Fixed-Rate versus an Adjustable-Rate Mortgage
Your decision to use a fixed- versus an adjustable-rate mortgage to finance the purchase of a home depends on your expectations of future interest rates. The primary advantage of an ARM is that the initial interest rate is lower than that of a fixed-rate mortgage. However, if interest rates rise, you may end up paying a higher interest rate on your mortgage than if you had obtained a fixed-rate mortgage.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt has already contacted financial institutions that quoted a 5% interest rate on a 15-year fixed-rate mortgage. They also offered the option of an adjustable-rate mortgage that specifies an initial rate of 4%, with the interest rate adjusted each year to an index reflecting the average cost of bank funds plus three percentage points.

Stephanie notices that financial experts have predicted an increase in interest rates in the near future. She is uncomfortable with uncertainty about her mortgage rate and how it could affect her mortgage payment. Although an ARM would result in a lower mortgage payment in the first year, it would result in a higher mortgage payment in the following years if interest rates increase. Thus, Stephanie prefers a fixed-rate mortgage over an ARM.
Decision to Own a Home versus Renting
When considering the purchase (and therefore ownership) of a home, you should compare the cost of purchasing a home with the cost of renting. People attribute different advantages and disadvantages to owning a home versus renting because preferences are subjective. Some individuals value the privacy of a home, while others value the flexibility of renting, which allows them to move without much cost or difficulty. The financial assessment of owning a home versus renting can be performed objectively. Once the financial assessment is conducted, personal preferences can also be considered.

Estimating the Total Cost of Renting and Owning
The main cost of renting a home is the monthly rent payment. There is also an opportunity cost of tying up funds in a security deposit, funds that could have been invested instead. Another possible cost of renting is the purchase of renter’s insurance.

The primary costs of purchasing a home are the down payment and the monthly mortgage payment. The down payment has an opportunity cost because the funds could have been invested to earn interest if they were not tied up in the purchase of the home. Closing costs are incurred at the time the home is purchased, although a portion of these costs might be tax deductible. Owning a home also involves some additional costs, such as maintenance and repair. Property taxes are assessed annually as a percentage of the home’s value. Homeowner’s insurance is paid annually and is primarily based on the value of the home.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt has found a home she likes and has obtained financing from a financial institution. Before making a final decision, she wants to compare the cost of the home to the cost of remaining in her apartment. Although she would prefer a home, she wants to determine how much more expensive the home is compared to the apartment. If she purchases the home, she expects to live in it for at least three years. Therefore, she decides to compare the cost of owning a home to the cost of renting over the next three years. First, Stephanie calculates the cost of renting:

COST OF RENT. Her estimated cost of renting is shown in the top panel of Exhibit 10.8. Her rent expense on her apartment that she shares with a roommate is currently $1,000 per month, so her annual rent is $12,000 (computed as 
$
1,000
×
12
). However, she expects that her share of the annual rent will be increased from $1,000 to $1,200 for next year, with no additional increase in the following two years. Therefore, she estimates her cost of renting over this period to be 
12
×
$
1,200
=
$
14,400
 per year, or $43,200 for the next three years (computed as 
$
14,400
×
3
).

Exhibit 10.8 Comparing the Total Cost of Renting versus Buying a Home over a Three-Year Period

Figure 10.8 Full Alternative Text
COST OF RENTER’S INSURANCE. She does not have renter’s insurance at this time, as the value of her household assets is low.
OPPORTUNITY COST OF SECURITY DEPOSIT. She provided a security deposit of $2,000 to the apartment complex. Although she expects to get this deposit back when she stops renting, there is an opportunity cost associated with it while she continues to rent the apartment. She believes she might earn 4% (after considering tax effects) annually if she had been able to invest those funds, which would generate annual interest of $80 (computed as 
$
2,000
×
.04
). The opportunity cost over three years is 
3
×
$
80
=
$
240
.

TOTAL COST OF RENTING. Stephanie adds these expected costs for the next three years, which results in a total cost of renting of $14,480 per year and $43,440 over the next three years, as shown in Exhibit 10.8.

Stephanie determines the total cost of purchasing a home by adding up expenses, subtracting any tax savings, and subtracting the value of the equity:

MORTGAGE PAYMENT. The primary cost of buying a home is the mortgage payment, which she expects to be $1,028 per month or $12,336 per year (not including payments for property taxes or home insurance).

DOWN PAYMENT. Stephanie would make a down payment of $15,000 to buy the home.

OPPORTUNITY COST OF THE DOWN PAYMENT. If Stephanie did not buy a house, she believes she could have invested the $15,000 and earned 4% per year after considering tax effects. Therefore, the annual opportunity cost (what she could have earned if she invested the funds) is computed as 
$
15,000
×
0.04
=
$
600
.
 The total opportunity cost over a three-year period is computed as three times the annual opportunity cost, or 
3
×
$
600
=
$
1,800
.

PROPERTY TAXES. Stephanie assumes that the annual property tax will be $3,000 based on last year’s property tax paid by the current owner of the home. Thus, the expected property tax payments over the next three years are estimated to be $9,000 (computed as 
3
×
$
3,000
).

HOME INSURANCE (INCLUDING MORTGAGE INSURANCE). Insurance on this home is expected to cost a total of $1,000 per year, or a total of $3,000 over a three-year period (computed as 
3
×
$
1,000
).

CLOSING COSTS. Closing costs (transaction costs) associated with buying a home must be included, although those costs are incurred only in the first year of a mortgage. The closing costs are estimated to be $4,000, as shown earlier.

MAINTENANCE COSTS. Stephanie expects maintenance costs on the home to be $3,000 per year, or a total of $9,000 for the three-year period (computed as 
3
×
$
3,000
).

UTILITIES. She will pay for utilities such as water and electricity and will incur a cable TV bill if she buys the home. She already incurs those costs while renting an apartment, so she does not need to include them in her analysis.

TAX SAVINGS. All homeowners should consider the potential tax savings that a home provides. However, Stephanie would not benefit from tax savings from purchasing her home, because her potential tax deductions are not large enough (as will be verified following this example). The specific analysis used to estimate tax savings will be illustrated following this example.

VALUE OF THE EQUITY INVESTMENT. A major advantage of owning a home is that Stephanie will have an equity investment in it that grows over time. Her down payment will be $15,000, and when using any mortgage amortization schedule online, she determines that she will pay about $19,000 in principal on her 15-year mortgage over the first three years. Therefore, the value of her equity investment would be $34,000 (computed as 
$
15,000
+
$
19,000
) over the three-year period. The value of this equity investment could be higher in three years if the market value of the home increases.

TOTAL COST OF PURCHASING A HOME. The total cost of purchasing a home over the three-year period is determined by adding all the expenses due to purchasing the home (which were estimated to total $78,808), subtracting the tax savings from purchasing the home (which is zero in Stephanie’s case), and then subtracting the equity investment that would exist in three years (estimated to be $34,000). As shown in Exhibit 10.8, Stephanie estimates that the total cost of purchasing the home over the three-year period will be $44,808.

The total cost of purchasing a home over three years is estimated to be $1,368 more than the estimated cost of renting over three years (computed as 
$
44,808
−
$
43,440
=
$
1,368
). Given such a small difference between the cost of purchasing the home versus renting over a three-year period, Stephanie decides that she wants to buy the home. She would rather live in a home that she owns than share an apartment.

Stephanie purposely used a conservative assumption in her analysis that the home’s market value would not change over time, but she expects that the home’s value may rise over time. Even if the value of the home increases by a small percentage, such as 1% per year, the market value of her equity in the home would increase by more than $4,000 in three years. With this revised assumption, the cost of purchasing the home would be less than renting an apartment over a three-year period.

Now that Stephanie has decided that she wants to purchase a home and can afford it, she negotiates with the seller, and she ultimately submits an offer of $145,000, which is accepted by the seller.

Estimating the Tax Savings from Purchasing a Home
As there are some expenses (such as interest on the mortgage and property taxes) associated with buying a home that can be tax deductible for homeowners who itemize their deductions, the potential tax savings from buying a home should be considered.

To illustrate how potential tax savings can be measured, reconsider the previous example:

Stephanie can estimate her interest expenses from paying her mortgage by applying an amortization table for her specific mortgage amount ($130,000), mortgage maturity (15 years), and mortgage rate (5%). Her interest expenses from paying her mortgage in her first year would be about $6,400.

Property taxes are tax deductible if Stephanie itemizes her tax deductions. Recall that she expects that her property taxes would be $3,000 for one year.
Stephanie may also derive tax savings from the points that she would pay (a one-time fee of $1,300) as part of the closing costs, because the points are tax deductible if she itemizes her tax deductions.

Stephanie’s potential itemized deductions in the first year from buying a home are as follows:

Type of Tax Deduction	Deduction in First Year
Interest	$6,400
Property Taxes	$3,000
Points	$1,300 (in first year only)
Total	$10,700
Thus, Stephanie’s total itemized deductions from buying a home would be $10,700 in the first year. However, if she chooses not to itemize her deductions, she can take the standard deduction of $13,850, which exceeds the total itemized deductions of $10,700. Therefore, if Stephanie buys the home, she will benefit more from the standard deduction than if she itemized her deductions (unless she has some other major itemized deductions unrelated to her home purchase). In future years, the benefit of the standard deduction over itemizing deductions would likely be even larger because the points deduction only applies in the first year, and her interest expenses within her mortgage payments decline each year as she pays down her mortgage balance. This analysis verifies that Stephanie would not derive any tax savings in the near future from purchasing a home.
Special Types of Mortgages
In some cases, prospective buyers do not qualify for a traditional fixed-rate mortgage or an adjustable-rate mortgage. Some special types of mortgages are available that can make a home more affordable.

Graduated Payment Mortgage
A graduated payment mortgage sets relatively low monthly mortgage payments when the mortgage is first created and then gradually increases the payments over the first five or so years. The payments level off after that time. This type of mortgage may be useful for someone whose income will increase over time because the mortgage payments will increase as the homeowner’s income increases.

graduated payment mortgage
A mortgage where the payments are low in the early years and then rise to a higher level over time.

Balloon Payment Mortgage
A balloon payment mortgage sets relatively low monthly payments and then requires one large payment (called a balloon payment) after a specified period (such as five years) to pay off the remainder of the mortgage loan. A balloon payment mortgage is sometimes offered by the seller of a home to the buyer, especially when the buyer cannot afford to make large monthly payments and does not qualify for a more traditional mortgage. In this situation, the seller might provide a mortgage for five years. The expectation is that the buyer’s income will rise, enabling the buyer to obtain a traditional mortgage from a financial institution before the end of the five-year period. Then the buyer will have enough cash to make the balloon payment to the seller.

balloon payment mortgage
A mortgage where the monthly payments are relatively low, but one large payment is required after a specified period to pay off the mortgage loan.

Interest-Only Mortgage
Interest-only mortgages are adjustable-rate mortgages that allow home buyers to pay only interest on the mortgage during the first few years. These mortgages were popular in the years before the financial crisis when house prices were rising rapidly. However, the mortgage payment increased abruptly when the homeowner had to begin making principal payments. Under the CFPB’s rules, interest-only mortgages cannot be qualified mortgages, and they are rarely offered today.
Mortgage Refinancing
Mortgage refinancing involves paying off an existing mortgage with a new mortgage that has a lower interest rate. You may use mortgage refinancing to obtain a new mortgage if market interest rates (and therefore mortgage rates) decline. One disadvantage of mortgage refinancing is that you will incur closing costs again. Nevertheless, it may still be advantageous to refinance, because the savings on your monthly mortgage payments (even after considering tax effects) may exceed the new closing costs. Mortgage refinancing is more likely to be worthwhile when the prevailing mortgage interest rate is substantially below the interest rate on your existing mortgage. It is also more likely to be worthwhile when you expect to be living in the home for a long time, because you will reap greater benefits from the lower monthly mortgage payments that result from refinancing. If you have an FHA-guaranteed mortgage, you may be eligible for the FHA’s “streamline refinance” program, which can be a faster and less expensive way to refinance for some borrowers.

mortgage refinancing
Paying off an existing mortgage with a new mortgage that has a lower interest rate.

Rate Modification
When interest rates decline, some mortgage lenders may be willing to allow a “rate modification” to existing mortgage holders with a fixed-rate mortgage. They may charge a one-time fee that is typically between $500 and $1,500. Your fixed-rate mortgage may be revised to reflect the prevailing mortgage rate. You can benefit because you receive a lower interest rate. You would not need to go through the process of refinancing through another mortgage lender or incur costs associated with a new mortgage application. Some mortgage lenders are willing to allow rate modifications because they realize that if they do not provide you with an opportunity to pay the lower interest rate, you will likely obtain a new mortgage from another lender and will pay off your existing mortgage. In that case, you will no longer make payments at the high interest rate, and your existing mortgage lender will lose you as a customer. By allowing a rate modification, your existing mortgage lender retains you as a customer by offering you a mortgage that is similar to what it is presently offering to other new customers, and it earns a one-time fee from you for modifying the mortgage rate that you are charged.

Refinancing Analysis
To determine whether you should refinance, you can compare the advantage of monthly savings of interest expenses to the cost of refinancing. If the benefits from reducing your interest expenses exceed the closing costs incurred from refinancing, the refinancing is feasible.

The advantages of refinancing (lower interest payments) occur each year, whereas the disadvantage (closing costs) occurs only at the time of refinancing. Therefore, refinancing tends to be more beneficial when a homeowner plans to own the home for a longer period. The savings from a lower interest payment can accumulate over each additional year the mortgage exists.

Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Refinancing
During the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021, the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage declined to about 3%, as mentioned earlier in this chapter. Many existing homeowners who had mortgages at rates of 6% or higher when they purchased their homes refinanced to capitalize on the extremely low mortgage rate during the COVID-19 pandemic. Consequently, the majority of all existing homeowners with a mortgage now have a very low mortgage rate. This enables them to pay a lower monthly mortgage amount and therefore saves them money every month that they can use for other purposes.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.mortgageloan.com and click on “Refinance.”

To get
Information about refinancing loans.
How a Mortgage Fits within Your Financial Plan
The following are the key mortgage loan decisions that should be included in your financial plan:

What mortgage amount can you afford?

What maturity should you select?

Should you choose a fixed-rate or an adjustable-rate mortgage?

By making informed decisions, you can avoid accumulating an excessive amount of debt. Exhibit 10.9 provides a summary of how Stephanie Spratt’s mortgage loan decisions apply to her financial plan.

Figure 10.9 Full Alternative Text
Discussion Questions
How would Stephanie’s mortgage financing decisions be different if she were a single mother of two children?

How would Stephanie’s mortgage financing decisions be affected if she were 35 years old? If she were 50 years old?
Summary
AFFORDING A HOME. When considering the purchase of a home, you should evaluate your financial situation to determine how much you can afford. To determine the amount you can afford when purchasing a home, consider the down payment that you can make. In addition, consider the amount of your income that you can use each month to cover the mortgage payment.

SELECTING A HOME TO PURCHASE. When shopping for a home, some of the key criteria used in the selection process are price, convenience of the location, quality of the school system, and potential resale value.

VALUATION OF A HOME. You can conduct a valuation of a home with a market analysis. Homes in the same area that were recently sold can be used to determine the average price per square foot. This price per square foot can then be applied to the square footage of the home you wish to value.

TRANSACTION COSTS. The transaction costs of purchasing a home include the down payment and closing costs. The key closing costs are points and the origination fee.

FINANCING WITH A FIXED-RATE MORTGAGE. A fixed-rate mortgage specifies a fixed interest rate to be paid over the life of the mortgage. Because most of the monthly mortgage payment on a 30-year mortgage is allocated to cover the interest expense in the early years, a relatively small amount of principal is paid off in those years. A 15-year fixed-rate mortgage is a popular alternative to the 30-year mortgage. It requires a larger monthly payment, but a larger proportion of the payment is allocated to principal in the early years.

FINANCING WITH ARMS. An adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) ties the interest rate to an interest rate index, so the mortgage interest rate changes over time with the index. Homeowners who expect interest rates to decline in the future are especially likely to choose ARMs.

BUYING A HOME VERSUS RENTING. Before making a final decision to buy a home, you can compare the total cost of owning a home versus renting over a particular period to determine which choice will enhance your financial position more. The total cost of owning a home is estimated by adding up the expenses associated with the home, subtracting the tax savings from owning the home, and subtracting the expected value of the home equity at the end of the period.

SPECIAL TYPES OF MORTGAGES. When prospective buyers do not qualify for a traditional mortgage, they may consider special types of mortgages that can make a home more affordable, such as a graduated payment mortgage, a balloon payment mortgage, or an interest-only mortgage.

MORTGAGE REFINANCING. You may consider mortgage refinancing when quoted interest rates on new mortgages decline. When refinancing, you will incur closing costs. Thus, you should consider refinancing only if the benefits (expected reduction in interest expenses over time) exceed the closing costs.

HOW MORTGAGE FINANCING FITS WITHIN YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Mortgage financing allows you to obtain a home, and therefore it may be necessary for you to complete your financial plan.
Review Questions
STEPS IN BUYING A HOME. What is your first task when considering buying a home? Why is this step important? How can a real estate agent help you?

PURCHASING A HOME. What are the two financial components you must consider before purchasing a home? Why should you consider them?

AFFORDABLE PAYMENTS. What should you consider when determining an affordable down payment and monthly mortgage payments?

ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND JOB STABILITY. How do economic conditions and the stability of your job affect the home-buying decision?

DANGER OF SPENDING THE MAXIMUM ON A HOME. Why is it dangerous for home buyers to spend the maximum amount that they can afford when purchasing a home?

SELECTION CRITERIA. How do price, convenience of the location, and maintenance affect your home-buying decisions?

REAL ESTATE AGENTS. What services do real estate agents provide?

SCHOOL SYSTEM INFLUENCE. Why is the reputation of the school system in the area of the home you are buying important?

HOME INSURANCE AND TAXES. Why do insurance costs and taxes vary among homes?

HOME RESALE VALUE. What is the main factor in determining a home’s resale value? How can you predict a home’s resale value? Who pays commissions when a home is sold?

MARKET ANALYSIS. Once you have reduced your list of three or four homes down to one home, what is your next step? Should you offer the price the seller is asking? Describe how you would conduct a market analysis of the home.

DEMAND FOR HOMES. Why does the value of a home depend on the demand for homes? What factors influence the demand for homes?

ECONOMIC CONDITIONS. How do strong economic conditions affect home values? Explain how a weak economy affects the value of homes.

MORTGAGE DEFAULT. What does it mean to default on a mortgage? How do changing home values affect mortgage defaults?

LOAN PROGRAMS. How do lenders protect their interest in a home? Describe two government-backed home loan programs.

CLOSING COSTS. What are closing costs? List and briefly describe the different closing costs you might incur when applying for a mortgage.

FIXED-RATE MORTGAGE. Describe the characteristics of a fixed-rate mortgage. Why do certain homeowners prefer a fixed-rate mortgage to an adjustable-rate mortgage?

AMORTIZATION TABLE. What is an amortization table? What does each mortgage payment represent?

MONTHLY MORTGAGE PAYMENTS. List the three factors that determine the amount of the monthly mortgage payment. Explain how each affects the payment.

ADJUSTABLE-RATE MORTGAGE. Discuss the characteristics of an adjustable-rate mortgage. What influences your choice of a fixed- or adjustable-rate mortgage?

MORTGAGE PREAPPROVAL. What does it mean to be preapproved for a mortgage? Why is it beneficial to get preapproved for a mortgage?

COSTS OF RENTING. What are the costs of renting a home?

COSTS OF BUYING A HOME. Describe some of the costs of buying a home. Are there potential tax savings associated with buying a home?

FEATURES OF SPECIAL TYPES OF MORTGAGES. Describe the features of graduated payment and balloon payment mortgages.

MORTGAGE REFINANCING. What is mortgage refinancing? Are there any disadvantages to refinancing?

MORTGAGE INSURANCE. What is mortgage insurance? How does it impact the cost of your mortgage?

HOME BUYER RISKS. What are some of the risks associated with buying a home?

QUALIFIED MORTGAGE. What is a qualified mortgage?

HOME INSPECTION. What is a home inspection? Why is it important for you to have a home inspected before purchase?

FHA LOANS. What is an FHA loan? How does the FHA or VA help individuals with lower incomes buy homes?

ESCROW ACCOUNTS. What is an escrow account? How do escrow accounts help protect the lender?

BALLOON PAYMENT MORTGAGE. What is a balloon payment mortgage? When is this type of mortgage useful?

COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND MORTGAGE REFINANCING. How did the COVID-19 pandemic impact mortgage refinancing?



