Chapter 21Integrating the Components of a Financial Plan

Antonio Guillem/Shutterstock

Throughout the previous chapters, you have been asked to complete a number of assignments and online exercises regarding your own financial situation. Now that you have completed your journey through the components of a financial plan, it is time for you to compile all this information and the many decisions you have made. Your first step was to determine the status of your personal finances. To do this, you used financial planning tools to establish your personal balance sheet, your cash flow statement, and your financial goals. You analyzed each part of the financial plan: budgeting, liquidity, personal financing, insurance, investments, and retirement and estate planning. As explained throughout this text, each component of a financial plan affects your ability to build your wealth and achieve your financial goals. This chapter explains how these components can be integrated so that you can build a more cohesive financial plan.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Review the components of a financial plan

Illustrate how a financial plan’s components are integrated
Review of Components of a Financial Plan
Chapter 1 introduced the key components of your financial plan. Each part of this text has focused on one of the six main components of your financial plan, which are illustrated once again in Exhibit 21.1 The decisions that you make regarding each component affect your cash flows and your wealth. The six components are summarized next, with information on how they are interrelated.

Exhibit 21.1 Your Financial Transactions

Figure 21.1 Full Alternative Text
Budgeting
Recall that budgeting allows you to forecast how much money you will have at the end of each month so that you can determine how much you will be able to invest in assets. Most importantly, budgeting allows you to determine whether your cash outflows will exceed your cash inflows so that you can forecast any shortages in that month. Your spending decisions affect your budget, which affects every other component of your financial plan. Careful budgeting can prevent excessive spending and therefore help you to achieve your financial goals.

Budgeting Trade-Off
Your budgeting decisions involve a trade-off between spending today and allocating funds for the future. Your budget should attempt to ensure that you have net cash flows every month for savings or retirement. The more funds you can save now, the more you will be able to spend in the future.

The most common problem that prevents effective financial planning is excessive spending. Although this problem has been discussed throughout the text, it deserves attention here because it directly affects some components of the financial plan, such as liquidity management (Part 2), insurance (Part 4), investments (Part 5), and retirement planning (Part 6). Many people overspend and so have no money left to allocate toward these other purposes. Some people would have been able to use 10% or more of their income for these other purposes if they spent money more wisely by planning ahead.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance

The underlying psychology behind overspending is the focus on immediate satisfaction. One of the most common forms of overspending is the purchase of a car that is much more expensive than the person can afford. This results in large financing payments, which limit the amount of money available for other purposes. Many people who have purchased a new car recently and have budget problems say that their $500 car loan payment every month uses up so much of their income that they have no money for liquidity, insurance, investments, or retirement planning.

However, they are likely in denial. They would have had the ability to allocate money to other purposes if they had purchased a more affordable car. It was their spending decision on the new car that caused the very large car loan payment, which has prevented them from other forms of financial planning. If they had purchased a less expensive car, they could have allocated $200 per month or more to other financial planning purposes.

Many people use a decision-making process in which they decide on their spending first and then allocate funds to personal financing purposes only if they have any money left over. Using this process, they may never have anything left over because there are always many reasons to spend now to achieve immediate satisfaction, whereas using funds for financial planning purposes does not provide benefits until the future.

If you have discretionary income (income that exceeds the expenses you must pay), you can avoid this type of dilemma if you decide to set aside a specific amount of your income each month (such as $200) for financial planning purposes, such as liquidity and retirement planning. If you comply with this budget rule, it will dictate how much you can spend each month for other purposes. With this approach, you may not be able to spend excessively. For example, if you are forced to set aside $200 per month, you may not be tempted to purchase a new car that would require car payments of $500 per month. Instead, you would be guided by your budget to buy a car that you can afford. Ultimately, this strategy will help you build your wealth so that you will have more money to spend in the future.

Managing Liquidity
You can prepare for anticipated cash shortages in a future month by ensuring that you have enough liquid assets to cover the deficiency. Some of the more liquid assets include a checking account, a savings account, a money market deposit account, and money market funds. The more funds you maintain in these types of assets, the more liquidity you will have to cover cash shortages. Even if you do not have sufficient liquid assets, you can cover a cash deficiency by obtaining short-term financing (such as using a credit card). If you maintain adequate liquidity, you will not need to borrow every time you need money. In this way, you can avoid major financial problems and therefore be more likely to achieve your financial goals.

Liquidity Trade-Off
Because liquid assets generate relatively low returns, you forgo the opportunity to earn a higher return on these assets. Many checking accounts do not earn interest, and the other types of liquid assets have relatively low interest rates. If you choose to earn higher returns by investing all your money in stocks or bonds, however, you may not have sufficient liquidity. Thus, you should maintain enough money in liquid assets to satisfy your liquidity needs and then earn a higher return on your other assets.

Personal Financing
Personal financing allows you to make purchases now without having the full amount of cash on hand. Thus, financing can increase the amount of your assets. Financing is especially useful for large purchases such as a car or a home.

Personal Financing Trade-Off
When you borrow to pay for a car, to purchase a home, or even to pay off a credit card balance, you affect your future budget, because the monthly loan payment means that you will have less cash available at the end of each month. Although a loan allows you to make purchases now, it restricts your spending or saving in future months while you are paying off the loan. Therefore, an excessive amount of financing can prevent you from achieving your financial goals. In addition, excessive financing may prevent you from paying off your loans on time and therefore could damage your credit rating or even cause you to file for bankruptcy.

Covering the monthly loan payment is easier if you select financing with a relatively long maturity. But the longer the maturity, the longer the loan will be outstanding, and the more interest you will pay.

You may want to consider paying off a loan before its maturity so that you can avoid incurring any more interest expenses, especially when the interest rate charged is relatively high. You should not use all your liquid funds to pay off a loan, however, because you will still need to maintain liquidity. Paying off loans rather than making additional investments is appropriate when the expected after-tax return on the investments you could make is lower than the interest rate you are paying on the loan.

Protecting Your Assets and Income
You can protect your assets or income (and therefore your wealth) by purchasing insurance. Recall from Chapters 11 and 12 that property and casualty insurance insures your assets (such as your car and home), health insurance covers health expenses, and disability insurance provides financial support if you become disabled. Life insurance (Chapter 13) provides your family members or other named beneficiaries with financial support in the event of your death. Thus, insurance protects against unexpected events that could reduce your income or wealth.

Insurance Trade-Off
Any money that is used to buy insurance cannot be used for other purposes such as investing in liquid assets, paying off loans, and making investments. However, your insurance needs should be given priority before investments. You are required to have insurance to cover your car and your home. You may also need life insurance to provide financial support to a family member.

Managing Investments
When making investments, recall that your main choices are stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). If you want your investments to provide periodic income, you may consider investing in stocks that pay dividends. The stocks of large, well-known firms tend to pay relatively high dividends, as these firms are not growing as quickly as smaller firms and can afford to pay out more of their earnings as dividends. Bonds also provide periodic income. If you do not need periodic income, you may consider investing in stocks of firms that do not pay dividends. These firms are often growing at a fast pace and therefore offer the potential for a large increase in stock value over time.

Investment Trade-Off
Investment decisions are exciting because they can potentially lead to large gains. However, whenever you use money for investments, you forgo the use of that money for some other purpose, such as investing in more liquid assets, paying off existing credit card debt, buying insurance, or investing in your retirement. You should make investments only after you have adequately covered the other personal finance functions.

If you try to earn high returns by investing all your money in stocks of smaller firms, you forgo some liquidity because the prices of these stocks are volatile, and you may want to avoid selling them when prices are relatively low. If you have sufficient liquid assets such as checking and savings accounts, however, you do not need additional liquidity from your investments in stocks.

By investing in the stocks of large, well-known firms, you may enhance your liquidity because you will receive dividend income and can easily sell the stocks if you need money. You can also enhance your liquidity by investing in U.S. Treasury bonds or highly rated corporate bonds, because these bonds provide periodic income and can easily be sold if you need money.

By investing in stocks of smaller firms, you can potentially earn very high returns. However, such an investment is very risky because these stocks commonly experience larger losses than investments in stocks of large, well-known firms. You can invest in small stocks without being exposed to the specific risk of an individual stock by investing in a mutual fund or ETF that focuses on small stocks. When market conditions are weak, however, such funds can experience large losses, although not as much as a single stock of a small firm.

Retirement Planning
Retirement planning can ensure that you will have sufficient funds to maintain a comfortable standard of living during your retirement. As discussed in Chapter 19, there are a variety of plans available, and there are many tax advantages to retirement savings.

Retirement Account Trade-Off
The more money you contribute to your retirement account now, the more you will have when you reach retirement age. However, you should make sure you can afford whatever you decide to contribute. You need to have enough money to maintain sufficient liquidity so that you can afford any monthly loan payments before you contribute to your retirement.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.kiplinger.com

To get
Useful information on a wide variety of financial planning topics that can help you complete and refine your financial plan.

When deciding whether to invest your money in current investments or in your retirement account, consider your goals. If you plan to use the investments for tuition or some other purpose soon, then you should not put this money into your retirement account. Funds invested in a retirement account are not liquid. Any money withdrawn early from a retirement account is subject to a penalty.

If your goal is to save for retirement, you should allocate money to a retirement account. Although you will not have access to these funds, you are typically not taxed on contributions to your retirement account until the funds are withdrawn at the time of retirement. This deferral of taxes is very beneficial. In addition, some employers match part or all of your contribution to a retirement account.

Maintaining Your Financial Documents
To monitor your financial plan over time, you should store all finance-related documents in one place, such as a safe at home or a safety deposit box. The key documents are identified in Exhibit 21.2
Exhibit 21.2 Documents Used for Financial Planning

Figure 21.2 Full Alternative Text
Integrating the Components
At this point, you have sufficient background to complete all the components of your financial plan. As time passes, however, your financial position will change, and your financial goals may change as well. You will need to revise your financial plan periodically to meet your financial goals. The following example for Stephanie Spratt illustrates how an individual’s financial position can change over time, how a financial plan may need to be revised as a result, and how the components of the financial plan are integrated.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

When Stephanie Spratt graduated college and began her full-time job about four years ago, she established the following goals (described in Chapter 1):

Purchase a new car

Buy a home

Make investments that will allow her wealth to grow over time

Build a large amount of savings by the time of her retirement in 20 to 40 years

Since establishing her goals four years ago, Stephanie has made much progress in her path toward financial success. Her progress over the last four years can be illustrated by comparing her personal balance sheet as of four years ago (which was provided and described in Chapter 2) to her personal balance sheet today, as shown in Exhibit 21.3. The second column provides Stephanie’s personal balance sheet as of four years ago, while the third column provides her personal balance sheet as of today.
Exhibit 21.3 How Stephanie Spratt’s Personal Balance Sheet Has Changed Since Four Years Ago
Figure 21.3 Full Alternative Text
Recall from Chapter 2 that at the time Stephanie was just beginning her full-time job, she had a relatively simple personal balance sheet. Her assets amounted to $6,000, and she had a student loan of $10,000 as her only liability. Thus, her net worth was 
−
$
4
,
000
 at that time.

The main changes in Stephanie’s personal balance sheet are summarized here:

Recall that when Stephanie started her full-time job four years ago, she had a student loan of $10,000 (as explained in Chapter 1), which is shown in the second column under the category of Long-Term Debt. She has since paid off that loan (as mentioned in Chapter 14), so the loan is now valued at zero today (see the third column).

Recall that four years ago when Stephanie began her full-time job, she had a car that was valued at $1,000 (as explained in Chapter 2), which is listed in the second column i under the category Total Household Assets. After working full-time for several months, she purchased a new car for $21,000 (as explained in Chapter 9). She still owns that car, and she believes it has a market value of about $12,000 now (due to depreciation over time), as shown in the third column.

Recall that when Stephanie purchased her new car, she obtained a car loan of $17,000 (as mentioned in Chapter 9). Since Stephanie paid off the car loan (as mentioned in Chapter 14), the value of the car loan is zero as of today, as shown under the category Long-Term Debt in the third column.

Two years ago, Stephanie purchased a home for $145,000, as explained in Chapter 10. She estimates the value of her home at $145,000 today, as shown under the Household Assets category in the third column.

When Stephanie purchased the home, she obtained a mortgage loan for $130,000. Since purchasing the home, Stephanie has paid off about $10,000 in principal on the mortgage loan. Therefore, her personal balance sheet shows the mortgage has a remaining value of $120,000 as of today, as shown i under the Long-Term Debt category in the third column.

Recall that while Stephanie owned no stock or other investments four years ago (as explained in Chapter 2), she recently invested in mutual funds and ETFs (as explained in Chapter 18). Her investments in these funds are valued at $4,000 as of today, as shown under the Investments category in the third column.

Stephanie recently started investing in her retirement account, as explained in Chapter 19. Her retirement account now has a balance of $1,000, as shown under the Investments category in the third column.

Exhibit 21.3 shows that Stephanie’s total assets are now worth $169,000, while her liabilities are now $120,000. Thus, her net worth is

Net Worth
=
Total assets 
−
Total liabilities
=
$
169,000
−
$
120,000
=
$
49,000
While Stephanie has made much progress, she needs to continue with careful financial planning in order to build more wealth over time. Exhibit 21.4 provides a summary of Stephanie Spratt’s financial plan as of today.
Exhibit 21.4 Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Plan
Figure 21.4 Full Alternative Text
Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
The web site www.bankrate.com

To get
A variety of financial planning tools that can help you conduct an integrated financial plan, including mortgage financing, retirement planning, and investing.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Your Personal Finance Decisions
Application
The MSN Money app (by Microsoft) is useful for a wide variety of personal finance decisions, including spending, budgeting, saving, and financing.

To Find It
Search for the MSN Money app on your mobile device.
Summary
FINANCIAL PLAN COMPONENTS. A financial plan consists of a budget (Part 1), a plan for managing liquidity (Part 2), a financing plan (Part 3), an insurance plan (Part 4), an investment plan (Part 5), and a plan for retirement and estate planning (Part 6). The budget determines how you will spend or invest your money. Your plan for managing liquidity will ensure that you can cover any unanticipated expenses. Your financing plan is used to finance large purchases. Financing also involves decisions that affect the interest rate you are charged and the duration of any loans. Your plan for protecting your assets and income requires decisions about what types of insurance to purchase and how much insurance to buy. Your investment plan determines how much money you allocate toward investments and how you allocate money across different types of investments. Your retirement and estate plan determines how much you periodically invest in your retirement account and how your estate will be distributed to your heirs.

HOW FINANCIAL PLAN COMPONENTS ARE INTEGRATED. The components of a financial plan are integrated. The budget plan depends on the other components of the financial plan. The amount of money available for any part of the plan depends on how much money is used for liquidity purposes, to make loan (financing) payments, to buy insurance, to make investments, or to contribute to retirement accounts. The more money you allocate toward any part of the financial plan, the less money you have for the other parts. Thus, a key aspect of financial planning is to decide which components of your financial plan deserve the highest priority, because the decisions made about those components will influence the decisions on the others.

The example featuring Stephanie Spratt’s financial plan shows how the plan can be segmented into the six components. The example also illustrates how the components are integrated so that a decision about any one component can only be made after considering the others. As time passes and financial conditions change, you should reevaluate and update your financial plan.
Review Questions
INTEGRATED FINANCIAL PLAN. Why is it important to integrate the components of your financial plan?

ROLE OF BUDGETING. How does budgeting fit into your financial plan? How is your financial plan affected by your spending? What is the budgeting trade-off?

EFFECTIVE FINANCIAL PLANNING. What is the most common problem that prevents effective financial planning? Why do some people spend too much money? How can you use a budget to help you with spending issues?

ROLE OF MANAGING LIQUIDITY. Discuss how managing liquidity fits into your financial plan. What is the liquidity trade-off?

PERSONAL FINANCING. Describe some advantages and disadvantages of using personal financing to achieve your financial goals. What is the personal financing trade-off?

PROTECTING YOUR ASSETS AND INCOME. How can you protect your assets and income? What is the insurance trade-off?

MANAGING INVESTMENTS. How does managing your investments fit into your financial plan? What is the investment trade-off?

RETIREMENT PLANNING. What is the retirement account trade-off?

IMPACT OF CHANGES OVER TIME ON YOUR PLAN. What are some ways a person’s personal and financial situation might change over time and impact their financial plan?

CHANGE IN FINANCIAL POSITION. What do you think happens to your budget when your cash inflows increase? What about when your cash outflows increase?

FINANCIAL DECISION. You have a $7,000 balance on your car loan at 6% interest. Your favorite aunt has just left you $10,000 in her will. You can put the money in a money market account at your bank and pay off your car loan, or you can invest the money in mutual funds. What factors must you consider in making your decision?

FINANCIAL DECISION. In the previous question, you decide to pay off the car loan and invest the difference. Now you no longer have a $350 per month car payment. Suggest some ways you might use these additional funds.

INVESTMENT DECISION. You have some extra cash in your budget that you wish to invest. You have narrowed your choices to a single stock, Treasury bonds, or a stock mutual fund or ETF. What characteristics of each investment alternative should you consider in making your decision?

ROLE OF CAR AND HOMEOWNER’S INSURANCE. How does purchasing car insurance and homeowner’s insurance help protect and maintain your wealth?

ROLE OF HEALTH AND DISABILITY INSURANCE. How does purchasing sufficient health insurance and disability insurance help protect and maintain your wealth?

LIFE INSURANCE. How does life insurance protect your wealth? Who needs life insurance?

GOAL SETTING. Explain why having very specific goals is important for financial planning.

TRACKING EXPENDITURES AND BUDGETING. Why is it important to track your expenditures for a few months? How does this practice impact your budget?

RECORD KEEPING. Why is it important to keep financial records stored in a safe location? List some important documents that you should keep in a safe place.

FINANCIAL GOALS. What are some common financial goals?

