Chapter 1Overview of a Financial Plan

Kudla/Shutterstock

How is it that Jill Warden could afford to purchase a nice condominium this year, while many of her friends who have similar income levels are barely able to pay their rent? Jill has made many personal finance decisions over time that have favorably affected her financial situation. She went to a well-respected but public university where the annual tuition was relatively low. She drives a car that is not flashy but is functional and economical. She uses much of her free time to exercise or stream movies, rather than spending money at restaurants or clubs. She buys nice clothes, but only when they are on sale and are not designer brands. These personal finance decisions saved her money, which allowed her to afford a nice condominium. Furthermore, she rents out a room in her condominium, which makes it easy for her to cover her monthly mortgage payment.

You have many personal finance decisions to make. Your choice of major in college has a significant impact on your job satisfaction and your future income. Your decision of what car to purchase has a major impact on your budget. Your decision of whether to live at home or get an apartment has a major impact on your budget. Personal finance decisions that require some sacrifice enable you to make other personal finance decisions that are rewarding.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Explain how personal finance can enhance your wealth.

Identify the key components of a financial plan.

Describe the process for making key personal finance decisions within your financial plan.
How Personal Finance Can Enhance Your Wealth
Personal finance (also referred to as personal financial planning) is the process of planning your spending, financing, and investing to optimize your financial situation. A personal financial plan specifies your financial goals and describes the spending, financing, and investing plans that are intended to achieve those goals. Although the United States is one of the wealthiest countries in the world, many Americans do not manage their financial situations well. Consequently, they tend to rely too much on credit and have excessive debt.

personal finance (personal financial planning)
The process of planning your spending, financing, and investing to optimize your financial situation.

personal financial plan
A plan that specifies your financial goals and describes the spending, financing, and investing plans that are intended to achieve those goals.

Historically, most educational systems have not given much attention to personal finance. Consequently, many people have limited personal finance skills or had to teach themselves in response to financial dilemmas that they experienced. To assess your own understanding, take the Financial Literacy Pre-Test that precedes this chapter. Even if you presently have limited personal finance skills, you have taken the first step to improve those skills by reading this text.

A first step in achieving your financial success is to establish a financial plan. In this plan, you assess your existing financial position and consider how you may be able to improve it so that you can use your money in the ways that you desire. This text introduces the key components of the financial plan and enables you to establish your own plan. The sooner you develop your goals and a financial plan to achieve those goals, the easier it will be to achieve your objectives.

Personal finance does not require you to be a genius, but it does require the use of common sense and discipline. If you make proper personal finance decisions, you will spend your money more carefully, which can reduce the amount of funds you need to borrow or can increase your savings. Either result increases your wealth and allows you to more easily afford purchases of products or services in the future.

Conversely, poor personal finance decisions can cause you to borrow excessively, to the point at which you might not be able to repay your debt. During the four-year period from 2019 through 2022, more than 2 million people in the United States filed for personal bankruptcy. You might think that personal bankruptcy only occurs for individuals who pursue a very risky strategy, such as losing all their money from gambling or making risky investments. Even for a person who is frugal with spending, personal tragedies and extreme life events can sometimes overwhelm personal financial stability. Some bankruptcies are unavoidable, such as those due to unexpectedly large medical costs over a long period of time. Making careful financial decisions is even more important in these situations.

Recognize the Financial Consequences of Each Decision
When making decisions on how to spend money, your decisions would be limited by the cash you have if credit was not available. However, as credit is widely available, it offers many more spending opportunities than if you always needed cash. Thus, you are exposed to many more possible personal finance decisions because you can access credit to pursue these opportunities.

Access to credit can be a blessing for some people who rely on credit to, for example, purchase a vehicle so that they can travel to their job or go to college to build their skills and pursue their dream careers. The use of credit may be easily justified if they buy a vehicle that allows them to go to work, so that they can earn income, or if they can achieve a college education that allows them to have a successful career. In these cases, the use of credit ultimately enables them to earn more income and therefore enables them to repay the loan. The financial consequence of their personal finance decision to use credit is favorable.

However, access to credit can be a curse for other people, if they use credit for personal finance decisions such as spending excessively on entertainment without a plan for how they will repay the loan. Consequently, they may not be able to recover from the debt that they accumulated. It’s critical to consider the potential financial consequences of personal finance decisions that are financed with credit.

You should recognize the potential financial consequences of any important personal finance decision that you make. To illustrate, suppose you have the option to either travel to Europe or work about 40 hours per week over the summer. Assume you have no savings to use, but your credit card can cover all of your expenses. The obvious financial consequences of traveling to Europe are that you might spend $10,000 (assuming $100 per day for 90 days, plus $1,000 for airfare). Alternatively, if instead you work this summer, you might earn $6,000 (assuming earnings of $600 per week for 10 weeks). The exact numbers are not important, but it is important that you measure the financial consequences of a decision like this so that you can weigh the trade-offs, as shown here:
	Go to Europe this summer	Work this summer
Amount of money borrowed (credit card) this summer	$10,000	$0
Income earned this summer	$0	$6,000
If you go to Europe for the summer, you not only build up debt of $10,000, but also give up income of $6,000, so there is a $16,000 difference between the two options. Furthermore, if you had $10,000 in credit card debt, your interest expenses would be very high, as credit card interest rates are commonly 20% or more.

Recognizing the financial consequences of each personal finance decision is not intended to prevent you from having fun, but to allow you to assess whether your expected benefits are worth the expense. In many cases, recognizing financial consequences might lead to a compromise between two options. In this example, perhaps your recognition of the financial consequences would have encouraged you to consider an alternative option in which you work this summer but squeeze in a two-week European vacation at the end of summer. This compromise could allow you to still earn $6,000 over the summer and spend perhaps $2,000 of that income on a European vacation, while avoiding large credit card debt.

A more comprehensive example is provided next to illustrate how personal finance decisions can substantially affect your wealth (in either direction). As you read through the example, think about the financial consequences of each personal finance decision that is mentioned.

Example
Jasmine and Tamara are twin sisters who performed equally well in high school. They have similar abilities and were in a similar financial position (limited spending money, but no debt) at the time they graduated from high school. They wanted to pursue college, but their parents could not afford to pay their college expenses. The main personal finance decisions that Jasmine and Tamara made in the following five years are summarized below.

Type of Personal Finance Decision	Jasmine’s Decisions	Tamara’s Decisions
Selection of university	Attended the local state university (tuition of $7,500 per year)	Attended the local private university, which has an academic reputation similar to that of the local state university (tuition of $30,000 per year)
Selection of major	Decided to major in nursing because she would enjoy a job in health care and because many sources suggested that there were many high-salery nursing jobs available	Selected a major that is known to require very little studying, and most students in this major get high grades without much effort
Use of credit card	Used to cover entertainment expenses; always paid off the balance each month	Used to cover entertainment expenses; only paid the interest expense each month during her college years
Housing during college	Lived at home with her parents and commuted to her university	Lived on campus at the private university, at a cost of about $13,000 per year
Work during college	Worked part-time during her college years to cover her entertainment expenses	Did not work during her college years
Car purchase after college	Decided to keep her old car instead of buying a new car because it was still running well	Traded in her old car so that she could buy a new one; needed to borrow $20,000 after the trade-in to purchase the car
Housing after graduating college	Lived at home with her parents for one year after college to avoid the expense of paying rent	Moved into a nice apartment by herself, where the rent was about $15,000 per year
Let’s compare the financial consequences of Jasmine’s and Tamara’s decisions after five years. Jasmine obtained a student loan of $30,000 to cover her four years of college tuition. She had no room and board expense because she was living at home. She had no credit card loan balance because she used the income from her part-time job to cover credit card payments.

Conversely, Tamara obtained student loans of $172,000 to cover her four years of college tuition 
(
four years
×
$
30,000
 per year
=
$
120,000
)
,
 plus room and board 
(
four years
×
$
13,000
=
$
52,000
)
.
 She also accumulated credit card debt of $10,000 because of her spending decisions while in college, and after graduating from college, she borrowed $20,000 to purchase a car. Thus, Tamara’s total debt within one year of graduating college was $202,000.

Now consider how Jasmine’s and Tamara’s very different personal finance decisions regarding their majors affected their occupation, their income level, and therefore their ability to repay their debt. Jasmine used her nursing degree to obtain a job as a nurse, earning an annual salary of $70,000 plus major health care and retirement benefits. By living at home (and avoiding rent payments) for one year after graduation, Jasmine was able to save enough money from her high-paying job to repay her $30,000 in student loans. As of one year after graduation, she has no debt.

Meanwhile, Tamara struggled to find a rewarding job after graduating with a degree that has little job marketability. She took a job that does not even require a college degree, which is paying her $30,000 per year. Tamara was unable to pay off any of her student loans and credit card balance. She believes that she was the victim of horrible luck, while her twin sister was unusually lucky. It will be very difficult for Tamara to overcome her debt problem.

Make Your Own Luck
Was Tamara really unlucky? Or were the results of her personal finance decisions predictable? If Tamara had considered the financial consequences of her personal finance decisions, she could have anticipated most of her debt because she knew what her annual tuition plus room and board expenses would be. The primary uncertain outcome of her pursuit of a college degree was the type of job she would attain upon graduation. Exhibit 1.1 describes Tamara’s opinions about what led to her financial demise, along with Jasmine’s counter to each of Tamara’s opinions.
Exhibit 1.1 Bad Luck Versus Bad Decisions for Tamara

Figure 1.1 Full Alternative Text
Not all bad outcomes following personal finance decisions are self-induced. There are many types of economic events or medical catastrophes out of your control that can cause financial problems. However, Tamara created her own bad luck. Tamara spent her college years enjoying life without a part-time job and without having to study, while living comfortably away from home. Each personal finance decisions was intended to achieve immediate gratification. Her dream after high school was not about achieving a particular career, but was simply about having an enjoyable time in college. She pursued that dream on borrowed funds without ever considering the financial consequences of her decisions.

Consider the personal finance decisions that led Jasmine to her desirable financial situation. She needed a student loan in order to pursue her personal finance decision of getting a nursing degree. But her decision to borrow funds ultimately allowed her to earn her college degree and attain her career goal. She pursued a rigorous nursing degree that required her full devotion for four years. Her school work along with her part-time job left very little free time, but she was willing to sacrifice because she knew her pursuit would ultimately lead to favorable financial consequences. She limited her spending to avoid credit card debt. She lived at home in order to avoid the room and board expenses of living on campus and even lived at home for a year beyond college graduation so that she could save enough money to pay off her student loan. Each of these decisions involved a trade-off, but Jasmine chose to make those sacrifices so that she could achieve her dream career and be debt-free within one year after college. Jasmine was rewarded for her sacrifices: She can move in to a nice apartment, buy a new car, or build her savings in order to purchase a home in the near future.

Test Your Own Judgment
Put yourself in the same position. Are you more like Jasmine or Tamara? Everyone’s financial situation is different, so your personal finance decisions about college will not necessarily match Jasmine’s or Tamara’s decisions. But even if you think it would be difficult to make personal finance decisions like Jasmine’s, it is useful to consider the trade-offs for any particular decision. Assess the four decisions in Exhibit 1.2, assuming that you have easy access to credit.

Exhibit 1.2 Practice Making These Personal Finance Decisions

Figure 1.2 Full Alternative Text
For each decision that you made, notice the expense that you would have incurred, which is shown in parentheses. Then add up your expenses from your four decisions. This exercise is intended to make you recognize the financial consequences of each personal finance decision that you make. If you selected the state university instead of the private university, you would have reduced your expenses by $90,000. However, you would still have expenses totaling $117,000 if you decided to live on campus during your college years and to purchase a new car and rent an apartment after college.

Whenever you are confronted with personal finance decisions, consider whether the benefits that you will receive from each option exceed the expenses. Furthermore, make each decision with recognition of other financial decisions that you have made so that you can evaluate trade-offs from any decision. To balance all of your financial decisions, you might defer some decisions in order to act on others. For example, if you decide to live away from home immediately after graduation and the rental expense uses up most of your monthly income, perhaps you could defer the decision to buy a new car. Or if you really want the new car, maybe you could defer the decision to live away from home.

The personal finance decisions that you make while in college and beyond are yours, for better or for worse. The freedom to make your own personal finance decisions is a valuable privilege, which can lead to major long-term rewards if used wisely. Capitalize on that freedom. Invest the time to weigh trade-offs and consider the potential financial consequences (good and bad) of each personal finance decision.

NOTE: Your professor may assign you the “Selecting Your Major” project and/or the “Planning Your Career” project, which are briefly described after the exercises at the end of this chapter. The projects can be found in Appendix B in the back of this textbook.

Reliance on Personal Finance Advice
You may be confronted with a personal finance decision for which you are unprepared. In this situation, you might need to rely on the advice of a friend or a professional. However, use caution when trusting the judgment of others who give you advice. Your understanding of personal finance may not make you an expert on every personal finance decision, but may at least help you determine whether to trust any specific advice offered to you.

Example
Reconsider the previous example, in which Tamara decided to attend a private university instead of a state university of similar academic quality. Tamara’s decision was primarily due to advice she received from three high school friends who went to that private university and who wanted her to join them. One friend was on a scholarship there, so her tuition was free. A second friend’s parents were paying for her tuition and room and board, so she would have no debt upon graduation. A third friend was on a partial scholarship and majored in mechanical engineering, for which the private university has a great reputation. Tamara’s three friends had very logical personal finance reasons for pursuing their education at that private university. Tamara should have recognized that her friends’ situations differed from hers, but she simply reasoned that she would have a lot of fun being on the same campus as her three friends over a four-year period.

Each of Tamara’s friends told her, “Chase your dreams.” When Tamara was ready to enroll in college, she had no long-term goals. Her dreams were completely focused on going away to college (a four-year vacation) and pursuing a major that would result in the minimal amount of work; she gave no consideration to a major that could have led to a rewarding career. The only advice that Tamara ignored was from her twin sister, Jasmine, who warned her about the potential long-term financial implications of pursuing an education where tuition payments were high and choosing a major for which there were very few jobs.

Tamara only listened to all the advice that would allow for the most satisfying outcomes while in college, with no consideration of the financial consequences after college. Now she is $202,000 in debt with nothing except a nonmarketable college degree to show for it.

When you rely on advice for personal finance decisions, evaluate whether the advisers are qualified to give you advice. Do they have more knowledge than you about how your decision will affect your financial position over time? Or are they providing advice that is intended to benefit themselves?

You may be naturally tempted to consider only the advice that reinforces your desire for immediate gratification. When you are considering going to Europe with your friends for the summer, they are more likely to advise you to join them than to pursue a full-time job in order to cover next year’s college expenses. When you are buying a new car, the salesperson is more likely to advise you that the “upgraded premium package is well worth the extra $8,000” instead of admitting that your smartphone already contains all the software in that package. Be careful who you listen to when relying on guidance to make your personal finance decisions.

Tamara’s twin sister Jasmine relied on advice from different sources to make her personal finance decisions. She visited credible career websites for information about a career in nursing. She spoke to a nurse and a career counselor about a nursing career, as these sources are qualified to offer valuable insight about the career and job opportunities and had no reason to misrepresent their opinions. They confirmed what Jasmine had already learned from her online information search, which convinced her to pursue a major in nursing. Jasmine also reviewed the nursing programs at the local state and private universities and learned about their tuition and fees before deciding to pursue her degree at the local state university. She had a substantial amount of valid information to use when making her education decisions and was well aware of the financial consequences of those decisions.

Using the Internet
The Internet can provide you with valuable information for making financial decisions. Your decision on whether to purchase a new car depends on the prices of new cars and financing rates on car loans. Your decision on whether to purchase a home depends on the prices of homes and financing rates on home loans. Your decision on whether to invest in stocks is influenced by the prices of stocks. Your decision on where to purchase insurance may be influenced by the insurance premiums quoted by different insurance agencies. All these financial decisions require knowledge of prevailing prices or interest rates, which are literally at your fingertips on the Internet.

The Internet also provides updated information on all parts of the financial plan, such as:

Current tax rates and rules that can be used for tax planning

Recent performance of various types of investments

New retirement plan rules that can be used for long-term planning

Many websites offer online calculators that you can use for a variety of financial planning decisions, such as:

Estimating your taxes

Determining how your savings will grow over time

Determining whether buying or leasing a car is more appropriate

Financial Planning Online exercises are provided at the end of each chapter so that you can practice using the Internet for financial planning purposes.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
The finance section of Yahoo.com.

To get
Information and many tools for all aspects of financial planning, including tax rates, bank deposit rates, loan rates, credit card information, mortgage rates, insurance policies, and investment information.

When you use online information for personal finance decisions, keep in mind that some information may not be accurate. Use reliable sources, such as websites that have a proven track record for reporting financial information. Also, recognize that free personal finance advice provided online does not necessarily apply to every person’s situation. Get a second opinion before you follow online advice, especially when it recommends that you spend or invest money, as that website might be sponsored by the company that would benefit if you spend money as advised.
Components of a Financial Plan
You can benefit from building your own financial plan, which consists of the following components:

Part 1: Managing your budget and income

Part 2: Managing your liquidity

Part 3: Financing your large purchases

Part 4: Protecting your assets and income (insurance)

Part 5: Investing your money

Part 6: Planning your retirement and estate

Each of the first six parts of this text is devoted to one component of the financial plan, and the seventh part synthesizes these components. To begin your introduction to the financial planning process, let’s briefly explore each component.

Part 1: Managing Your Budget and Income
Budget planning (also referred to as budgeting) is the process of forecasting future expenses and savings. That is, it requires you to determine how you spend money, the amount of money you want to spend, and the amount you want to save (Exhibit 1.3). Long-term budgeting is also necessary to save for major decisions in the future such as buying a new car, buying a home, raising a family, and retiring.

Exhibit 1.3 Cash Flows Due to Your Budgeting Decisions

Figure 1.3 Full Alternative Text
budget planning (budgeting)
The process of forecasting future expenses and savings.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance
Your Spending Decisions
Application
The Spending Tracker app (by MH Riley Ltd) allows you to easily monitor how you spend your money.

To Find It
Search for the Spending Tracker app on your mobile device.

You can evaluate your current financial position by assessing your income, your expenses, your assets (what you own), and your liabilities (debt, or what you owe). Your net worth is the value of what you own minus the value of what you owe. You can measure your wealth by your net worth. As you save money, you increase your assets and therefore increase your net worth. Budget planning enables you to build your net worth by setting aside part of your income to either invest in additional assets or reduce your liabilities.

assets
What you own.

liabilities
What you owe; your debt.

net worth
The value of what you own minus the value of what you owe.

A key part of budgeting is estimating the typical expenses that you will incur each month. If you underestimate expenses, you will need more cash inflows (money that you receive) than you expected to cover your cash outflows (money that you spend).

Recognize that a portion of your income will likely be taxed. The higher your taxes are, the lower your disposable income will be. Therefore, you may be able to increase your disposable income by taking full advantage of specific income tax rules that are intended to reduce your taxes.

Part 2: Managing Your Liquidity
You should have a plan for how you will cover your daily purchases. Your expenses can range from your morning cup of coffee to major car repairs. You need to have liquidity, or access to funds to cover any short-term cash needs (Exhibit 1.4).

Exhibit 1.4 Cash Flows Due to Your Liquidity Management Decisions

Figure 1.4 Full Alternative Text
liquidity
Access to funds to cover any short-term cash needs.
You can enhance your liquidity by using money management and credit management strategies. Money management involves decisions regarding how much money to retain in a liquid form (easily convertible to cash) and how to allocate the funds among short-term investments. A simple example of a very liquid asset is money deposited in a checking account at a financial institution, because you can easily use this account if you do not have sufficient cash to make a payment. Finding an effective liquidity level involves deciding how to invest your money so that you can earn a return but also have easy access to cash if needed. Although a checking account offers liquidity, it does not earn interest, so your money management strategy might be to keep enough funds in a checking account to cover possible cash shortages, while investing other funds in short-term investments such as a savings account at a financial institution that earns interest.

money management
Decisions regarding how much money to retain in a liquid form and how to allocate the funds among short-term investment instruments.

Credit management involves decisions about how much credit you need to support your spending and which sources of credit to use. Many financial institutions offer credit cards to their customers. Many individuals rely heavily on credit cards as a convenient form of credit because they are widely accepted and there is usually no interest charged if the balance is paid off each month. Credit is commonly used to cover both large and small expenses when you are short on cash, so it enhances your liquidity.

credit management
Decisions regarding how much credit to obtain to support your spending and which sources of credit to use.

Part 3: Financing Your Large Purchases
Loans are typically needed to finance large expenditures, such as the payment of college tuition or the purchase of a car or a home. The amount of financing needed is the difference between the amount of the purchase and the amount of money you have available (Exhibit 1.5). Managing loans includes determining how much you can afford to borrow, deciding on the maturity (length of time) of the loan, and selecting a loan that charges a competitive interest rate.

Exhibit 1.5 Cash Flows Due to Your Financing Decisions

Figure 1.5 Full Alternative Text
Part 4: Protecting Your Assets and Income
To protect your assets, you can conduct insurance planning, or determining the types and amount of insurance that you need (Exhibit 1.6). Automobile insurance and homeowner’s insurance protect your assets, and health insurance limits your potential medical expenses. Disability insurance and life insurance protect your income. You pay insurance premiums to insurance companies in order to insure your assets, health, or income.
Exhibit 1.6 Cash Flows from Protecting Your Assets and Income

Figure 1.6 Full Alternative Text
insurance planning
Determining the types and amount of insurance needed to protect your assets.

Part 5: Investing Your Money
Any funds that you have beyond what you need to maintain liquidity should be invested. Because these funds normally are not used to satisfy your liquidity needs, they can be invested with the primary objective of earning a high return (Exhibit 1.7). Potential investments include stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and real estate. You must determine how much of your funds you wish to allocate toward investments and what types of investments you wish to consider. Most investments are subject to risk (uncertainty surrounding their potential return), however, so you need to manage them so that your risk is limited to a tolerable level.

Exhibit 1.7 Cash Flows from Investing

Figure 1.7 Full Alternative Text
risk
Uncertainty surrounding the potential return on an investment.

Part 6: Planning Your Retirement and Estate
Retirement planning involves determining how much money you should set aside each year for retirement and how you should invest those funds (Exhibit 1.8). Retirement planning must begin well before you retire so that you can accumulate sufficient mon to invest and support yourself after you retire. Money contributed to various kinds of retirement plans is protected from taxes until it is withdrawn from the retirement account.

Exhibit 1.8 Cash Flows from Retirement and Estate Planning

Figure 1.8 Full Alternative Text
retirement planning
Determining how much money you should set aside each year for retirement and how you should invest those funds.

Estate planning is the act of planning how your wealth will be distributed before or upon your death. Effective estate planning protects your wealth against unnecessary taxes and ensures that your wealth is distributed in the manner that you desire.

estate planning
Determining how your wealth will be distributed before or upon your death.

Building Your Own Financial Plan
An effective financial plan enhances your net worth and therefore builds your wealth. In each part of this text, you will have the opportunity to develop a component of your financial plan. At the end of each chapter, the Building Your Own Financial Plan exercise offers you guidance on the key decisions that you can make after reading that chapter. Evaluate your options and make decisions using the Excel-based software available with your text. By completing the Building Your Own Financial Plan exercises, you will build a financial plan for yourself by the end of the school term.

Summary of Financial Plan Components
Notice in the previous six diagrams (one for each financial plan component) how the decisions made within each component can cause you to either make cash payments (your cash outflows) or generate cash (your cash inflows). A summary of the financial plan components is provided in Exhibit 1.9. This summary is a consolidation of the diagrams for each of the six components of the financial plan.
Exhibit 1.9 How Financial Planning Affects Your Cash Flows

Figure 1.9 Full Alternative Text
Summary of Sources of Cash
As you review the six components in Exhibit 1.9, notice that each component can help you obtain cash. When you need more cash, you can consider these alternatives:

Attempt to work more hours (Part 1)

Withdraw cash from savings (Part 2)

Obtain a loan (Part 3)

Cash in an insurance policy or receive insurance payments (Part 4)

Sell some of your investments (Part 5)

Withdraw funds from your retirement account (Part 6)

Your optimal choice when deciding how to obtain cash depends on various conditions that are explained throughout the text.

Summary of Uses of Cash
As you review the six components in Exhibit 1.9, notice that each component can also help you decide how to use cash. Each of your spending decisions has an opportunity cost, which represents what you give up as a result of that decision. By spending money for a specific purpose, you forgo alternative ways that you could have spent the money and also forgo saving the money for a future purpose. For example, your decision to buy an expensive video game prevents you from using that money to save for a new car. Financial decisions that increase your savings today enhance your ability to purchase more products and services in the future.

opportunity cost
What you give up as a result of a financial decision.

When you have cash, you can consider these alternatives:

Purchase products and services (Part 1)

Deposit cash in your checking or savings account (Part 2)

Pay interest payments on a loan or pay off a loan (Part 3)

Pay insurance premiums (Part 4)

Make new investments (Part 5)

Contribute toward your retirement account (Part 6)

Your optimal choice when using cash depends on various conditions that are explained throughout the text.

Integration of the Financial Plan Components
As you learn about each of the six components of your financial plan, keep in mind that your decisions about one component of the plan can affect all the others. The integration of financial plan components is covered in Chapter 21. It is important to understand how these components are integrated so that you recognize trade-offs before you finalize your conclusions about any component of your financial plan.

FREE APPS f
A Process for Making Your Financial Decisions
As explained in the previous section, your financial plan represents the consolidation of your individual financial goals, along with the personal finance decisions that can achieve those goals. You may have many financial goals that are part of your financial plan, such as additional education, purchasing a car, buying a new home, and making some investments. Your primary personal finance concern will change over time, but you can focus on your most immediate financial goal at any point. For any personal finance decision that requires much thought, apply the following six steps.

Step 1: Determine Your Most Immediate Financial Goal
Given the large number of complex personal finance decisions that you might face, focus your assessment on one primary financial goal at a time. You can defer some financial decisions. Perhaps your most immediate financial goal is completing your college degree, so your most relevant personal finance decisions are which courses to take over the next year and how to finance the cost of completing your degree. Thus, you can defer many other personal finance decisions, such as buying a home, buying insurance, or retirement planning. Throughout this text, you will have the opportunity to focus on one key personal finance decision at a time. It will be much easier when making that decision to focus only on the factors that may influence that decision.

Be realistic about your personal finance goals so that you can have a strong likelihood of achieving them. Chasing a dream can be discouraging if you are unwilling or unable to do what is necessary to achieve the dream.

Timing of Goals
Financial goals can be characterized as short term (within the next year), intermediate term (typically between one and five years), or long term (beyond five years). For instance, a short-term financial goal may be to accumulate enough money to purchase a car within six months. An intermediate-term goal would be to pay off a student loan in the next three years. A long-term goal would be to save enough money so that you can maintain your lifestyle and retire in 20 years. You are probably most interested in your short-term goals, but ideally your strategies to achieve those goals would not threaten your ability to achieve other goals in the distant future.

Step 2: Consider Your Current Financial Position
Your decisions about how much money to spend next month, how much money to put in your savings account, how often to use your credit card, and how to invest your money depend on your financial position. Individuals with little debt and many assets have more flexibility in their strategies to achieve their immediate goals than individuals who have a large amount of debt and few assets. And a single individual without dependents will have different financial means than a couple with children, even if the individual and the couple have the same income. The appropriate strategy also varies with your age and wealth. If you are 20 years old with zero funds in your bank account, your strategy to achieve your financial goal may be different than when you are 65 years old and have saved much of your income over the last 40 years.

Step 3: Compare Alternative Strategies That Could Achieve Your Goal
Given your immediate financial goal (which you identified in Step 1), you need a strategy that could help move you from your existing financial position (which you assessed in Step 2) toward achieving your financial goals. To achieve your most immediate financial goal, you may need to obtain funds now or in the future.

Common ways to earn more money include working more hours at your existing job, pursuing a new job that pays a higher salary, or working a separate part-time job on the side. Common ways to spend less money include reducing your housing expense or reducing your entertainment activities. Alternatively, you could consider selling investments or other types of assets to raise the funds that would help achieve your immediate financial goal.

Only consider strategies that you believe you would be willing to execute. A strategy that requires you to save almost all your income in order to achieve your financial goal is useless if you are unable or unwilling to follow that strategy. When an overly ambitious strategy fails, you may become discouraged and lose interest in trying to achieve any financial goals.

How Psychology Affects Your Strategies
Psychology has a major impact on human behavior. Therefore, it has a major impact on your ability to implement strategies that could help you achieve a financial goal. Some people allow their desire for immediate satisfaction and their focus on peer pressure to influence most of their financial planning decisions. This causes them to spend excessively, meaning that they make purchases that are not necessary. Consumers often make impulse purchases, which are purchases made on the spur of the moment, even if they don’t need the products they purchased or were not shopping specifically for those products. The boost this “retail therapy” provides may quickly vanish, however, so that additional therapy (shopping) is needed.

People who spend based on peer pressure may purchase a new car that they cannot afford, even if they already own a reliable car, just because their friends or neighbors have a new car. Although they receive the immediate satisfaction of having the new car, they now also have the obligation of a monthly car payment for the next four years. The behavior of people who spend based on immediate satisfaction and peer pressure causes them to spend excessively now, which leaves nothing for the future. This behavior may make it difficult for them to implement a strategy that can help them achieve a financial goal. They may need to become more disciplined to effectively implement their strategies. Alternatively, they could revise their financial goal so that is more attainable.

Other people have more discipline when deciding whether to spend all their income, and their decision making is influenced by other psychological forces. They may have a strong desire to avoid debt at this point in their lives, because they would feel stress from the obligation of making large debt payments. For this reason, they may avoid purchasing a new car or any other purchases that would cause large credit card payments, and this allows them to use their income for other purposes. People who exhibit this type of behavior can more effectively implement strategies to meet their financial goal.

Step 4: Implement the Best Strategy for Achieving Your Goal
Once you develop possible strategies to achieve your goal (Step 3), you can evaluate those possible strategies and select the one that will be most effective for achieving your goal. Many strategies that could possibly help you achieve your immediate financial goal involve trade-offs. There may be many strategies that would attempt to increase your income or reduce your expenses, but the best strategy depends on your specific goal and your existing financial situation.

If you are presently working part-time and have a lot of free time, working more hours might be the ideal solution to achieve your financial goal. Conversely, if you are working overtime already and have no free time, you may need to reduce your expenses to achieve your goal. Perhaps sharing your housing with a roommate could cut your housing expenses in half, which might help you build your savings to achieve your financial goal.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt is a recent college graduate whose personal finance history is documented with many examples inserted throughout this text. Five years ago, when she graduated from high school, she established a financial goal (Step 1) of working within the business world; she ultimately hoped to become a manager.

At the time, Stephanie assessed her existing financial position (Step 2). She was living at home and had no knowledge of business. She had very little money and was working part-time, but she felt that her existing job would not help her attain even a low-level job in the business world.

Stephanie identified four possible strategies to achieve her immediate financial goal (Step 3) of working in the business world:

Hire a tutor who could teach her about business.

Attempt to get an internship at a business in which she would work for free and hope to attain a low-level job at a business in the future.

Go to the local junior college to pursue an associate degree and then apply for low-level jobs in business.

Go to the local junior college to pursue an associate degree and then to the local college to pursue a college degree in business, before applying for jobs in business.

Stephanie evaluated these four strategies. She believed that strategies (a) and (b) were risky and might not lead to a job. Strategy (c) would take about two years, but still might not lead to a job. Strategy (d) would take a total of about four years but was the most likely to achieve her financial goal.

Stephanie considered the potential costs and benefits of each alternative. While she did not want to delay four more years before entering the business world, she recognized that she would have more upward mobility in the business world if she completed a college degree in business. Therefore, she decided to pursue strategy (d).

After junior college, Stephanie commuted to the local state college, where the tuition was relatively low compared to most colleges. She also worked part-time so that she could pay off part of her college expenses while living at home.

Stephanie has completed her degree in business. Her only debt is a student loan of $10,000. She recently obtained a full-time job in business and has moved into an apartment, which she shares with a roommate. Stephanie has entered the business world and is on track to achieve her financial goal of someday becoming a manager in the business world.

Step 5: Evaluate the Strategy That You Implemented
After you develop and implement your strategy, monitor your progress to ensure that it is working as you intended. In the previous example, Stephanie Spratt achieved her initial financial goal of entering the business world by obtaining a business degree, with the hope of becoming a manager someday. But the criteria necessary to become a manager might change over time, which is why Stephanie needs to monitor her progress toward her goal of becoming a manager. Some businesses might require employees to have a master’s degree in business before they can be a manager. If this rule was enforced across most businesses, Stephanie would likely try to obtain a master’s degree by taking one or two courses after work each semester.

Step 6: Revise Your Strategy or, if Necessary, Your Goal
If you find that you are unable or unwilling to follow the strategy that you developed, revise the strategy to make it more effective. Of course, your immediate financial goal may be too ambitious and may have to be modified as well if your strategies are not effective.
If you achieve your financial goal, you can focus on a new immediate financial goal and repeat the steps described here to achieve that goal. Exhibit 1.10 summarizes the steps that you can apply in order to achieve a particular financial goal.

Exhibit 1.10 Summary of Steps to Achieve Your Immediate Financial Goal

Figure 1.10 Full Alternative Text
Combining Your Financial Goals
At some point in your life, you may want to combine many of your financial goals as part of your overall financial plan. However, if you consider your financial goals simultaneously, it is difficult to apply the steps just described. If your goals include purchasing a new car and a home, the steps to achieve both goals will likely be conflicting. When you implement a strategy of working more hours and reducing entertainment expenses in order to save money for a new car, it may not allow you to pursue strategies to purchase a home. For this reason, it is much easier to focus on one immediate financial goal at a time.

One compromise is to establish a list of goals, give the top goal on the list the highest priority, and focus on strategies to achieve that goal. If that goal is achieved, consider the next goal, and so on.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt was recently hired by the sales department of an advertising firm at an annual salary of $43,000. Stephanie plans to save a portion of every paycheck so that she can invest money to build her wealth over time. She realizes that by establishing a financial plan to limit her spending today, she can increase her wealth and therefore her potential spending in the future. At this point, Stephanie decides to develop an overview of her current financial position, establish her most relevant goals for the near future, and map out a plan for how she might achieve those goals, as shown in Exhibit 1.11.
Exhibit 1.11 Stephanie Spratt’s Immediate Goals and Strategy

Figure 1.11 Full Alternative Text
Key decisions that relate to Stephanie’s financial plan are summarized at the end of each chapter. Your personal finance decisions will differ from Stephanie’s or anyone else’s. Nevertheless, the process of developing a strategy to achieve your immediate financial goal is the same. You need to establish your immediate goal, assess alternative strategies for reaching your goals, and decide on a strategy that can achieve your goals.
Summary
HOW PERSONAL FINANCE CAN ENHANCE YOUR WEALTH. Personal financial planning is the process of planning your spending, financing, and investing to optimize your financial situation. Effective financial planning decisions can allow you to improve your spending decisions, thereby reducing your debt and increasing your net worth.

COMPONENTS OF A FINANCIAL PLAN. A financial plan has six components: (1) budgeting, (2) managing your liquidity, (3) financing large purchases, (4) protecting your assets and income, (5) investing, and (6) planning for retirement and the future.

PROCESS FOR MAKING PERSONAL FINANCE DECISIONS. The process for making a personal finance decision contains six steps: (1) establish your financial goal, (2) consider your current financial position, (3) identify and evaluate alternative strategies that could achieve your goal, (4) select and implement the best strategy for achieving your financial goal, (5) evaluate your strategy over time to ensure that you can achieve your goal, and (6) revise your strategy if necessary in order to achieve your goal, or if you do not believe you will be able to achieve your existing goal, then revise your goal so that it is achievable.
Review Questions
PERSONAL FINANCE DECISIONS. Define personal financial planning. What types of decisions are involved in a personal financial plan?

PERSONAL FINANCE AND YOUR WEALTH. How can an application of personal finance skills increase your wealth?

ADDITIONAL EDUCATION. How can your post–high school education decisions affect your wealth?

PERSONAL FINANCE AND LIFE DECISIONS. How can an understanding of personal finance help you make better life decisions?

FINANCIAL PLAN COMPONENTS. What are the six key components of a financial plan?

BUDGET PLANNING. Why is it important to track your spending before creating a budget?

NET WORTH. How is your net worth calculated? Why is it important?

INCOME AND BUDGETING. What factors influence income? Why is an accurate estimate of expenses important in budget planning?

LIQUIDITY. What is liquidity? What two factors are considered in managing liquidity? How are they used?

FINANCING. Why do most people need access to financing at some point in their lives?

INVESTING. What is the primary objective of investing? What else must be considered? What potential investment vehicles are available?

PROTECTING YOUR ASSETS. What are the three elements of planning to protect your assets? Define each element.

YOUR CASH FLOWS. How does each element of financial planning affect your cash flows?

STEPS IN FINANCIAL PLANNING. What are the six steps for making a financial decision?

FINANCIAL GOALS. How do your financial goals fit into your financial plan? Why should goals be realistic? What are three time frames for goals? Give an example of a goal for each time frame.

YOUR FINANCIAL POSITION. Name some factors that might affect your current financial position.

FINANCIAL GOALS AND PLANNING. Jill has decided to save 50% of her income for retirement. Her father told her she needed to set a lower goal. Why do you think he gave her this advice?

IMPLEMENTING YOUR PLAN. Once your financial plan has been implemented, what is the next step? Why is it important?

REVISING YOUR PLAN. Why might you need to revise your financial plan?

ONLINE INFORMATION. What are some possible disadvantages of using online sources of personal finance information?

SETTING GOALS. Why should you list and prioritize your personal finance goals?

TYPES OF GOALS. What is the difference between short-term, intermediate-term, and long-term goals? Why is it important to have all three types of goals?

PEER PRESSURE AND YOUR FINANCES. How can peer pressure affect your spending habits?

SELECTING THE RIGHT COLLEGE. Why do you think your selection of a particular university for your college education could have a major impact on your financial condition during your college years and beyond?

SELECTING YOUR MAJOR. Why do you think your choice of major in college could affect your financial plan?

YOUR CAREER AND LIFETIME GOALS. Ricardo wants a career where he can help people. He also wants to travel and experience the world. He is thinking about becoming a personal care aide. What advice would you give him?

COLLEGE AND COSTS. What are some ways you can lower the cost of a college education?
