Chapter 11Auto and Homeowner’s Insurance

Shutterstock

Matt was recently in a major accident that caused extensive damage to his eight-year-old sedan. When his insurance company asked Matt to get an estimate of the cost of repairs, he took it to a well-respected repair shop. They quoted a total repair bill of $5,250.

Matt was prepared to pay his $250 deductible as long as the insurance company paid the rest. Because the book value of a car of his make and model, in good condition, is only $3,240, the insurance company “totaled” his car, declaring it a total loss and reimbursing him only to the extent of the book value. Matt must either repair the car using the insurance company reimbursement plus more than $2,000 out of his own pocket or accept the loss and buy another car.

Understanding your insurance needs is important when determining the type and amount of coverage you need to shield you from financial loss and protect you against liability.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Explain insurance and risk management.

Describe the role of insurance companies.

Provide a background on auto insurance.

Identify the factors that affect your auto insurance premium.

Explain how to respond if you are in an auto accident.

Describe the key provisions of homeowner’s insurance.

Describe the factors that influence the premiums paid for homeowner’s insurance.

Describe the use of renter’s insurance.

Describe the use of umbrella personal liability insurance policies.

Explain how insurance fits within your financial plan.
Insurance and the Management of Risk
Property insurance ensures that any damages to your auto and home are covered and that your personal assets are protected from any liability. In the context of insurance, the term liability is used to mean that you may be required to pay other individuals for damage that you caused to them or their property. Health insurance can ensure that most of your medical bills will be covered and therefore can also protect your personal assets from any liability. Life insurance can ensure financial support for your dependents, other individuals, or charities when you die.

liability
The amount that you may be required to pay other individuals for damage that you caused to them or their property.

The primary function of insurance is to maintain your existing level of wealth by protecting you against potential financial losses or liability as a result of unexpected events. It can ensure that your income continues if an accident or illness prevents you from working, or it can prevent others from taking away your personal assets.

In the context of insurance, the term risk can be defined as exposure to events (or perils) that can cause a financial loss. Risk management represents decisions about whether and how to protect against risk. The first step in risk management is to recognize the risks to which you are exposed. Then you must decide whether to protect against risk. Your alternative strategies are to avoid risk, reduce risk, or insure against risk. If you decide to insure against risk, you can select the amount of coverage as well as policy provisions.

risk
The exposure to events or perils that can cause a financial loss.

risk management
Decisions about whether and how to protect against risk.

Avoid Risk
Owners of property are exposed to a financial loss if their property is damaged. You can avoid the risk of property damage by not owning any property. However, you cannot completely avoid risk by avoiding property ownership. If you lease a car instead of owning one, you are still exposed to liability and financial loss if the car is in an accident. Other types of risk are unrelated to property. For example, you are exposed to a financial loss if you require medical attention or become disabled.

Reduce Risk
One method of managing risk is to reduce your exposure to financial loss. For example, you can purchase a small home rather than a large home to reduce the maximum possible financial loss due to property damage. You can purchase an inexpensive car to limit the possible financial loss due to property damage. You may reduce the risk of losses on your home due to a fire by installing a fire alarm or smoke detector. You may be able to reduce your exposure to an illness or a disability by getting periodic health checkups.

However, these steps do not fully block your exposure to financial loss. If you drive a car, you are not only subject to property damage for your car but also liability for damage to other vehicles and their drivers if you are found to be at fault for an accident. Your financial loss could be large even if the car you drive has little value.

Accept Risk
A third alternative when managing risk is to accept risk and not seek to limit your exposure to a financial loss. This alternative may be feasible when the likelihood of an event that could cause a financial loss is very low and the potential financial loss due to the event is small. For example, if you seldom drive your car and live in a town with little traffic, you are unlikely to get into an accident. You are also more likely to accept risk when the possible financial loss resulting from the event is limited.

Psychology Behind Accepting Risk
PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance

Many people opt to accept risk rather than pay for insurance because they do not feel much satisfaction from buying insurance. When they make a payment, they may feel that they receive nothing in return. Buying insurance is different from buying many other products or services that provide immediate benefits. Some people might argue that they only benefit from insurance if an unfortunate event occurs that causes them to need it. Otherwise, they may perceive insurance as a waste of money. However, they should consider their potential liability if an adverse event happens and they do not have insurance. In many cases, people do not make an informed decision to accept risk but simply defer the decision to buy insurance because they do not want to spend the money. Or they may have a mindset that they will be careful and will therefore avoid any undesirable event that would require insurance.

However, people do not have much control over whether adverse events occur. Careful drivers can have a major car accident. Prudent homeowners can be subject to major house damage due to weather. People with healthy diets can suffer from a major illness. The cost of an adverse event could completely wipe out one’s savings.

Insure Against Risk
A final alternative is to insure against risk. If you cannot avoid a specific type of risk, you cannot reduce that risk, and you do not wish to be exposed to financial loss due to the risk, you should consider insurance.

The decision to obtain insurance is determined by weighing the costs and the benefits. The cost of obtaining insurance is the premium that is paid for a policy each year. The benefit of obtaining insurance is that it can protect your assets or your income from events that otherwise might cause a financial loss. Consequently, you protect your existing net worth and increase the likelihood that you will be able to increase your net worth in the future.

premium
The cost of obtaining insurance.

You benefit from having auto insurance even when you do not receive any payments from the insurance company because you have the peace of mind of knowing that your assets are protected if you are in a collision. Insurance is costly, but it may be well worth the cost to ensure that your wealth will not be taken away from you. By recognizing your exposure to possible losses, you can purchase insurance that properly protects you against the possible losses that could occur.

You cannot insure against all types of risk, as some types of insurance are either unavailable or too expensive. Your risk management will determine which types of risk you wish to insure against. When there is a high likelihood that an event will cause a financial loss, and the potential financial loss from that event is large, insurance should be considered. You may choose to accept the types of risk that might only result in small financial losses. In this chapter and the following two, you will learn the key provisions of auto, homeowner’s, health, disability, and life insurance. With this background, you can determine your own risk management plan.

Your risk management decisions are also affected by your degree of risk tolerance. For example, you and your neighbor could be in the same financial position and have the same exposure to various types of risk. Yet you may obtain more insurance than your neighbor because you are more concerned about exposure to financial loss. Although you incur annual insurance expenses from insurance premiums, you are protected from financial losses resulting from covered perils.

Impact of the Economy on the Decision to Insure Against Risk
ECONOMIC IMPACT

Your decision to insure against risk may be influenced by economic conditions. When economic conditions are favorable and incomes are higher, people are willing to purchase insurance or increase their insurance coverage. When economic conditions are weak, people tend to reduce their insurance so that they can use their funds for other purposes. However, consider the possible danger of reducing your insurance coverage in a weak economy. You might not have alternative ways to cover unexpected expenses, especially if your future income is uncertain. Insurance should not be viewed as an optional purchase that is dropped whenever your income declines. Some level of insurance is necessary, just like food and shelter. Insurance can help you cover major expenses due to specific events (such as a car accident or medical problem) that could otherwise cause considerable financial problems for you.
Role of Insurance Companies
Insurance companies offer insurance policies that can protect you against financial loss. They charge premiums to the insured in return for the insurance they provide.

Because there are many different types of risk that could cause financial losses, there are many different types of insurance that can protect you from those risks. Exhibit 11.1 describes the common events that can cause a major financial loss and the related insurance that can protect you from these events. The most popular forms of insurance for individuals are property and casualty insurance, life insurance, and health insurance. Property and casualty insurance is used to insure property and therefore consists primarily of auto insurance and home insurance. Some insurance companies specialize in a particular type of insurance, whereas others offer all types of insurance for individuals. Companies that offer the same type of insurance vary in terms of the specific policies that they offer.

Exhibit 11.1 Common Events That Could Cause a Financial Loss

Figure 11.1 Full Alternative Text
Some insurance companies are stand-alone operations, but other insurance businesses are associated with financial institutions such as commercial banks, savings institutions, or securities firms. Some financial institutions have insurance centers within their branches to enable customers to take care of their insurance needs where they receive other financial services.

Insurance Company Operations
When an insurance company sells an insurance policy to you, it is obliged to cover claims as described in the insurance policy. For example, if your car is insured by a policy, the insurance company is obligated to protect you from financial loss due to an accident. If an accident occurs, the insurance company provides payments (subject to limits specified in the contract) to cover any liability to the driver and passengers and to repair property damage resulting from the accident.

In general, insurance companies generate their revenue from receiving payments for policies and from earning a return from investing the proceeds until the funds are needed to cover claims. They incur costs from making payments to cover policyholder claims. The majority of policyholders do not need to file claims during the coverage period. When an insurance company makes payments due to a claim, the payments are commonly more than the annual premium that was paid by the policyholder. For example, consider a policyholder who pays $1,000 in auto insurance for the year who is in an accident, and the insurance company has to pay $20,000 to cover liability and repair the car. The payout by the insurance company is 20 times the premium received. In other words, it would take a total of 20 auto insurance policy premiums to generate enough revenue to cover the cost of the one claim.

When you buy insurance, you are relying on the insurance company to provide you with adequate coverage over a future period. However, if the insurance company mismanages its operations, it could experience large losses and not be able to cover your claim. In addition, you would probably lose the premium that you had already paid. Thus, it is important to select an insurance company that is financially strong. Several services rate the financial strength of insurance companies, including A.M. Best (www.ambest.com), Demotech, Inc. (www.demotech.com), Moody’s Investors Service (www.moodys.com), and S&P Global Ratings (www.spglobal.com/ratings/en/). The ratings indicate if the insurance companies are in good financial shape and therefore should be able to cover any claims filed in the future.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.ambest.com

To get
Information about how insurance companies are rated.

Relationship between Insurance Company Claims and Premiums
Because insurance companies rely mostly on their premiums to cover claims, they price their insurance policies to reflect the probability of a claim and the size of the claim. For an event that is very unlikely and could cause only minor damage, the premium would be relatively low. For an event that is more likely and could cause major damage, the insurance premium would be relatively high.

Insurance Underwriters
An insurance company relies on underwriters, who calculate the risk of specific insurance policies, to decide what insurance policies to offer and what premiums to charge. Underwriters recognize that their insurance company must generate revenue that is greater than its expenses to be profitable, so they set premiums that are aligned with anticipated payouts.

underwriters
Hired by insurance companies to calculate the risk of specific insurance policies and to decide what policies to offer and what premiums to charge.

Group Insurance Company Policies for Employers
Insurance companies commonly offer group insurance policies to employers so that their employees can obtain discounts, especially for health insurance and disability insurance. Check with your employer to determine if you can obtain the insurance you desire through them. In most cases, the premium you are charged through your employer’s insurance plan will be less expensive than if you attempt to obtain the insurance on your own.

Role of Insurance Agents and Brokers
When you are researching insurance coverage, you will probably communicate with an insurance agent or broker. An insurance agent represents one or more insurance companies and recommends an insurance policy that fits the customer’s needs. Captive (or exclusive) insurance agents work for one particular insurance company, whereas independent insurance agents (also called insurance brokers) represent many different insurance companies. They are linked online to various insurance companies and therefore can quickly obtain quotes for different policies. In addition to helping customers with various types of insurance, insurance agents may also offer financial planning services, such as retirement planning and estate planning. In addition, some insurance agents are certified to serve as brokers for mutual funds or other financial products.

insurance agent
An agent who recommends insurance policies for customers.

captive (or exclusive) insurance agent
An agent who works for one particular insurance company.

independent insurance agent
An agent who represents many different insurance companies.
The best insurance companies provide quick and thorough claims service. Sources of information on service by insurance companies include the Better Business Bureau, Consumer Reports magazine, and state insurance agencies.
Auto Insurance
Auto insurance insures against damage to an automobile and expenses associated with accidents. In this way, it protects one of your main assets (your car) and limits your potential liabilities (expenses due to an accident). If you own or drive a car, you need auto insurance. Policies are purchased for a year or six months at property and casualty insurance companies. Your policy specifies the amount of coverage if you are legally liable for bodily injury, if you and your passengers incur medical bills, and if your car is damaged as the result of an accident or some other event (such as a tree falling on the car).

Auto Insurance Policy Provisions
An insurance policy is a contract between the insurance company and the policyholder. An auto insurance policy specifies the coverage (including dollar limits) provided by an insurance company for a particular individual and vehicle. The contract identifies the policyholder and family members who are also insured if they use the insured vehicle. You should have insurance information such as your policy number and the name of a contact person at the insurance company with you when you drive. If you are in an accident, exchange your insurance information with that of the other driver and fill out a police report.

insurance policy
A contract between an insurance company and the policyholder.

auto insurance policy
A policy that specifies the coverage provided by the insurance company for a particular individual and vehicle.

Every auto insurance policy explains what is covered in detail. Review your auto insurance policy as you read on so that you understand your coverage.

Coverage A: Liability Coverage
Liability coverage consists of two key components: (1) bodily injury liability and (2) property damage liability. Bodily injury liability coverage protects you against liability associated with injuries that you (or family members listed on the policy) cause. You or your family members are also covered if you cause injuries to others while driving someone else’s car with the owner’s permission. Bodily injury expenses include medical bills and lost wages due to an accident that you cause. The coverage is designed to protect you if you cause an accident and the driver of the other car sues you.

bodily injury liability coverage
Coverage that protects against liability associated with injuries caused by the policyholder.

Given the large awards granted in lawsuits in the United States, having adequate liability coverage is critical. Any legal expenses incurred by an insurance company when defending you against a lawsuit are not considered when determining the limits on liability coverage. For example, if a person sues you and is awarded an amount that is less than the liability limit in your contract, it is covered by your policy regardless of the legal expenses incurred by the insurance company. If the award granted in a lawsuit against you exceeds the limit on your policy’s liability coverage, you will be required to pay the difference and therefore could lose your other assets. At a minimum, you should have coverage of $50,000 for any individual and $100,000 to cover all persons who are injured. A more common recommendation is $100,000 for any individual and $300,000 to $400,000 to cover all injured persons.

Property damage liability coverage protects you from losses that result when you damage another person’s property with your car. Examples include damage to a car, a fence, a lamppost, or a building. Note that property damage liability does not cover your car or other property that you own. A common recommendation for property damage liability coverage is between $40,000 and $50,000.

property damage liability coverage
Coverage that protects against losses that result when the policyholder damages another person’s property with their car.

Policy Limits
The auto insurance policy specifies monetary limits on the coverage of the bodily injury per person, bodily injury for all people who are injured, and property damage. The policy’s limits are often presented as a set of three numbers, split by slashes that are referred to as split liability limits. For example, the split liability limit of 100/300/50 means that the coverage is limited to $100,000 per person injured in an accident, $300,000 for all people combined, and $50,000 to cover damage to the car or other property. If one person suffers bodily injury that results in a liability of $80,000, the entire amount of the liability is covered. If one person’s bodily injury results in a liability of $120,000, the coverage is limited to $100,000. If four people suffer bodily injuries amounting to a total of $400,000, $300,000 of that amount is covered.
Almost all states have financial responsibility laws that require individuals who drive cars to purchase a minimum amount of liability insurance. States that do not require liability insurance may require you to show that you can cover damage that you cause. State governments recognize that if an uninsured driver causes an accident, they would avoid financial responsibility for any individuals harmed in the accident. These important state laws tend to require a very low level of insurance, which would not cover the liability in many accidents.

financial responsibility laws
Laws that require individuals who drive cars to purchase a minimum amount of liability insurance.

There are two types of financial responsibility laws. The first type requires that drivers show proof of auto insurance when they register the car to receive their license plates. This law is not always effective, because some drivers obtain insurance and then cancel it after they receive their license plates. The second type requires that drivers show proof of their auto insurance when they are in an accident. If they are caught without insurance, they may lose their driver’s license. However, the uninsured driver still escapes financial responsibility at the expense of other individuals who are harmed in the accident.

The minimum liability coverage varies by state but is usually at least $10,000 to cover each person injured in an accident, $30,000 to cover all persons injured in an accident, and at least $10,000 to cover property damage to the car. Exhibit 11.2 shows the minimum insurance required by all states. Find the minimum level for your state. Because there are drivers in your state who are underinsured, you will need adequate insurance in case you are in an accident with a driver who has minimal auto insurance, even if the accident is their fault.

Exhibit 11.2 Minimum Auto Insurance Liability Limits

Figure 11.2 Full Alternative Text
Coverage B: Medical Payments Coverage
Medical payments coverage insures against the cost of medical care for you and other passengers in your car when you are deemed to be at fault in an accident. The medical coverage applies only to the insured car. If you were driving someone else’s car, the owner of that car would be responsible for the medical coverage for passengers in that car. You can also obtain medical insurance that covers you if you ride in a car driven by an uninsured driver.
medical payments coverage
Coverage that insures against the cost of medical care for you and other passengers in your car when you are at fault in an accident.

Some advisers may suggest that a minimal amount of medical payments coverage is adequate for your car if you have a good health insurance plan. However, medical payments coverage can be valuable even if you have health insurance, because your health insurance policy would not cover nonfamily passengers in your car who could be injured. The coverage may even include funeral expenses.

If the driver of the other car in the accident is determined to be at fault, the medical payments may be covered by that driver’s policy. However, if that driver’s insurance provides insufficient coverage, your policy can be applied. Some states require that drivers obtain a minimum amount of medical payments coverage, such as $1,000 per person. However, insurance professionals recommend a higher level of coverage, such as $10,000 per person.

Coverage C: Uninsured or Underinsured Motorist Coverage
Uninsured motorist coverage insures against the cost of bodily injury when an accident is caused by another driver who is not insured. Given the large number of uninsured drivers, this coverage is needed.

uninsured motorist coverage
Coverage that insures against the cost of bodily injury when an accident is caused by another driver who is not insured.

The coverage also applies if you are in an accident caused by a hit-and-run driver or by a driver who is at fault but whose insurance company goes bankrupt. This coverage applies to bodily injury when you are not at fault, while the liability coverage from Part A applies to bodily injury when you are at fault. Like the insurance on bodily injury in Part A, there are policy limits that you specify, such as $100,000 per person and $300,000 for all persons. The higher the limits, the higher the insurance premium. At a minimum, you should have coverage of $40,000 per accident. Some financial planners recommend coverage of $300,000 per accident.

You can also obtain underinsured motorist coverage to insure you against bodily injury and drivers who have insufficient coverage. About 12% of all drivers have no auto insurance. Suppose that there is bodily injury to you as a result of an accident caused by an underinsured driver. If the damages to you are $40,000 and the insurance policy of the underinsured driver only covers $30,000, your insurance company will provide the difference of $10,000.

underinsured motorist coverage
Coverage that insures against bodily injury and drivers who have insufficient coverage.

Coverage D: Collision and Comprehensive Coverage
Collision and comprehensive coverages insure against damage to your car. Collision insurance insures you against the costs of damage to your car resulting from an accident in which you are at fault. Comprehensive coverage insures you against damage to your car that results from floods, theft, fire, hail, explosions, riots, vandalism, and various other events.

collision insurance
Coverage that insures against costs of damage to your car resulting from an accident in which the policyholder is at fault.

comprehensive coverage
Coverage that insures against damage to your car that results from floods, theft, fire, hail, explosions, riots, vandalism, and various other events.

Collision and comprehensive coverage are optional. Car loan providers, however, may require the borrower to maintain insurance that will cover any property damage to the car to protect the lender if the car owner has an accident and stops making the loan payments on the car loan. The car that serves as collateral on the loan may be worthless if it is damaged in an accident. More than 75% of all insured drivers purchase collision and comprehensive coverage.

Collision and comprehensive coverage are especially valuable if you have a new car that you would likely repair if it were damaged. The coverage may not be so valuable if you have an old car, because you may not feel the need to repair damage as long as the car can still be driven. Note that the coverage is limited to the cash value of the car.
Collision coverage is normally limited to the car itself and not to items that were damaged while in the car. For example, if you were transporting a new computer at the time of an accident, the damage to the computer would not be protected by comprehensive coverage.

Deductible
The deductible is the amount of damage that you are responsible for paying before any coverage is provided by the insurance company. For example, a deductible of $250 means that you must pay the first $250 in damages due to an accident. The insurance company pays any additional expenses beyond the deductible. The deductible is normally between $250 and $1,000.

deductible
A set dollar amount that you are responsible for paying before any coverage is provided by your insurer.

Other Provisions
You can elect coverage for expenses not covered in the standard policy. Guaranteed Auto Protection (GAP) insurance covers the difference between the amount that you owe on your auto loan and the amount that the insurance company will pay you if your car is stolen, damaged, or totaled. You may be offered GAP insurance when you buy a car, but you rarely are required to purchase it. If the lender tells you that GAP insurance is required, ask to see the provision in the sales contract that requires it.

Other provisions may relate to car rentals. A policy can cover the cost of a rental car while your car is being repaired after an accident. You can also elect coverage for towing, even if the problems are not the result of an accident. Your premium will increase slightly for these provisions. You can also include a provision in your auto insurance policy to cover any car that you rent. If you do not have such a provision, the rental car agency will typically offer to sell you collision damage coverage, liability insurance, medical coverage, and even coverage for theft of personal belongings from the car. If rent-a-car insurance is not covered by your policy, some credit cards provide you with collision and comprehensive insurance benefits when you use that card to pay for the rental services.

An auto insurance policy also specifies exclusions and limitations of the coverage. For example, coverage may not apply if you intentionally damage a car, if you drive a car that is not yours without the permission of the owner, or if you drive a car that you own but that is not listed on your insurance policy. It also explains how you should comply with procedures if you are in an accident.

Summary of Auto Insurance Provisions
The most important types of coverage identified earlier are included in a standard insurance policy. They are summarized in Exhibit 11.3. Notice that the exhibit classifies the potential financial damages as (1) related to your car in an accident, (2) related to the other car or other property in an accident, and (3) related to your car when not in an accident.

Exhibit 11.3 Summary of Auto Insurance Provisions

Figure 11.3 Full Alternative Text
In general, liability coverage is the most expensive component of insurance, as it accounts for about 55% of the total premium on average. Note that the limits for bodily injury are specified. The cost of collision and comprehensive insurance commonly represents about 30% of the total premium, but it varies with the car. The cost of collision insurance represents a higher proportion of the total premium for new cars than for older cars.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance
Managing Your Insurance Policy
Application
The GEICO Mobile app (by GEICO) allows you to pay your insurance bill, access your insurance policy, and manage your insurance policy. Although this app is exclusively for GEICO customers, some other insurance companies also provide similar apps for their customers.

To Find It
Search for the GEICO app on your mobile device.
Auto Insurance Premiums
Your insurance premium is influenced by the likelihood that you will submit claims to the insurance company and the cost to the insurance company for covering those claims. The average annual premium for full insurance coverage in 2023 was about $1,600, although some drivers do not obtain full coverage.

Rise in Insurance Premiums over Time
The average auto insurance premium in 2023 increased by about 20% from just two years earlier. This is partially attributed to inflation, which has increased the cost of auto repairs. Another reason for increased auto insurance premiums is auto insurance fraud, whereby people submit false claims for reimbursement by insurance companies. Common forms of fraud include staging an accident, injury, theft, or arson to collect money illegally. Some individuals file claims for damage that existed before the accident; others deliberately leave their car somewhere or dump it into a lake and then claim that it was stolen. Sometimes dishonest repair shops overcharge for repairs. Studies show that almost 25% of bodily injury claims resulting from auto accidents are false or exaggerated, and 10% of property claims are also false. False claims cost auto insurers an estimated $40 billion or more per year, and that cost is reflected in higher auto insurance premiums. Your annual auto insurance premium might be $300 more because of the higher cost of insurance due to fraud.

Some insurance abuse stems from attorneys who aggressively seek out anyone who has been in an accident. Personal injury attorneys may encourage accident victims to embellish their circumstances to create grounds for a lawsuit, as the attorneys could receive a third or more of the award. The awards granted by the courts for “pain and suffering” combined with attorneys’ fees cost insurance companies a substantial amount of the insurance premiums they collect. Some states have implemented no-fault insurance programs, which do not hold a specific driver liable for causing the accident. The intent is to avoid costly court battles in which each driver attempts to blame the other. No-fault provisions vary among the states that have imposed such laws. In general, the insurance companies in these states provide coverage (up to specified limits) to their respective policyholders for direct costs incurred due to bodily injury, medical bills, replacement of lost income due to the insured’s inability to work, and funeral expenses. However, they do not pay for indirect expenses such as emotional distress or pain and suffering due to an accident.

no-fault insurance programs
Programs that do not hold a specific driver liable for causing the accident.

However, no-fault insurance plans have not stopped fraud. A very popular form of fraud in recent years is for people to create fake medical issues in staged accidents in order to generate large medical reimbursements for specific health care providers who are also part of the scheme.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.nerdwallet.com and go to the section on Auto Insurance.

To get
An estimate of your cost of auto insurance based on your car, driving habits, and age.

How Your Car Characteristics Affect Premiums
The type of car you drive and the amount of coverage provided by your insurance policy affect the premium that you pay.

Value of Your Car
Insurance premiums are more expensive when the potential financial loss is greater. The collision and comprehensive insurance premiums are high for new cars. In addition, the premium is normally more for an expensive car than an inexpensive car of the same age. For example, the insurance on a new Mercedes is higher than the insurance on a new Nissan Versa. For more information, do an online search of the most expensive or least expensive cars to insure. Many websites offer plenty of information on this topic.

Repair Record of Your Car
Some car models require more repair work for the same type of damage. Some cars are much easier to repair if they are damaged. In 2023, the average annual premium for full insurance coverage of a Honda CR-V was about $1,700, yet the average annual premium for full insurance coverage of a Tesla Model Y was more than $3,000. In general, minivans are relatively inexpensive to repair and therefore to insure, while two-door sports cars are much more expensive to repair and insure.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance
Auto Insurance Information
Application
Many apps allow you to obtain premium quotations from several major insurance companies, based on personalized information that you enter.

To Find It
Search for “auto insurance quotes” apps on your mobile device.

How Your Personal Characteristics Affect Premiums
Other factors that characterize you personally affect your insurance premium.

Your Age
Insurance companies often base their premiums on personal profiles, and age is one of the most important characteristics. Younger drivers are more likely to get into accidents, and therefore they pay higher insurance premiums. In particular, drivers between the ages of 16 and 25 are considered to be high risk. The average annual premium for full auto insurance coverage for a 16-year-old driver is more than $8,000 and is about three times the average annual premium for a 25-year-old driver, and about two times the average annual premium for a 19-year-old driver. Insurance companies incur higher expenses from covering their claims and offset the higher expenses by charging higher premiums.

Another important characteristic is gender or sex, as young male drivers tend to get into more accidents than young female drivers. Therefore, male teenagers are charged very high auto insurance premiums. Depending on the company, transgender individuals may be assessed rates based on their sex assigned at birth, the sex/gender marker listed on their driver’s license, or simply the gender the person identifies with.

Your Mileage
You are more likely to get into an accident the more miles you drive. Thus, your premium will be higher if you drive more. Many insurance companies classify drivers into two or more mileage groups. For example, if you drive less than 10,000 miles per year, you may qualify for the low-mileage group, which entitles you to a lower premium.

Your Driving Record
If you have an excellent driving record, including no accidents and no traffic tickets for a year or longer, you may be charged a lower premium than other drivers. The annual insurance premium charged in the year following a speeding ticket is about 25% higher, on average. Because most insurance companies attempt to avoid drivers with a history of causing accidents, these drivers cannot comparison shop effectively. They may have to accept the premium of any insurance company that is willing to insure their car. Once drivers are labeled as high risk, several years of safe driving are required to prove that they have improved their driving habits. Thus, they will pay relatively high insurance premiums for several years.

Your Location
Auto insurance tends to be more expensive in large cities, where the probability of being involved in an accident is higher. The expenditures also vary among states for a given year, as you can see in Exhibit 11.4. Highly populated, highly urban states with much traffic such as Connecticut and California often have higher premiums than less populated, largely rural states such as Idaho and Vermont. Within each state, insurance expenditures vary. For example, insurance in Los Angeles is much higher than insurance in other parts of California.

Exhibit 11.4 Comparison of Average Annual Insurance Premiums Among U.S. States

Source: FORBES ADVISOR, 2023.
Figure 11.4 Full Alternative Text
Your Driver Training
Insurance companies recognize that driver training can improve driver performance and reduce the likelihood of accidents in the future. They encourage drivers to take driver training programs. If you have completed a driver training program, you may qualify for a discount.

Your School Performance
Insurance companies recognize that good students also appear to be safer drivers. Therefore, they may charge good students lower premiums.

Your Credit History
Insurance companies have found that persons with poor credit histories tend to make more insurance claims. Therefore, the insurance company will probably look at your credit history and charge you a higher premium if your record is poor and you have a low credit rating. A few states do not allow insurance companies to base premiums on the applicant’s credit history, but in most states, this has become a common practice.

Your Insurance Company
One final factor that affects your auto insurance premium is the insurance company that you select. The largest companies providing auto insurance are Allstate, GEICO, Progressive, State Farm, and USAA. These five companies account for about 58% of all auto insurance provided in the United States.

Auto insurance premiums can vary substantially among insurance companies, so always obtain several quotes before you select an insurance company. Several websites (such as www.esurance.com) provide auto insurance quotes online. Some websites even allow you to buy insurance online.

If you have specific questions about coverage and want to speak to an insurance salesperson, you can call some insurance companies directly. A comparison of quotes online might at least help you determine which insurance companies to call for more information. Alternatively, you can call an independent insurance agent, who can help you purchase insurance from one of several insurance companies.

When comparing prices, recognize that the price comparison may vary with the type of policy desired. For example, an insurance company may have relatively low premiums compared to its competitors for a policy involving substantial coverage for bodily injury liability, but relatively high premiums for a policy involving collision coverage. Therefore, you should not select a company based on advice you receive from friends or family members. If their policy is different from the policy you desire, another company may offer a better deal. In addition, companies change their premiums over time, so a company may charge relatively low premiums in one period but relatively high premiums in the following period for the same policy.

Comparing Prices at the Time of Renewal
Once an auto insurance policy has been in effect for 60 days, an insurance company can only cancel your policy if you provided fraudulent information on your application, if your driver’s license is suspended, or if you do not pay your insurance premium. However, an insurance company may decide not to renew your policy when it expires if you had a poor driving record over the recent policy period. For example, it is unlikely to renew your contract if you caused an accident as a result of drunk driving. Federal law also allows a company to deny renewal if your credit rating has declined, although state law may restrict a company’s ability to do this.

If an insurance company is willing to renew your policy, it may raise the premium in the renewal period even if your driving record has been good. You can switch to a different insurance company when the policy expires if you are not satisfied with your present insurance company or think that the premium is too high. You should compare auto insurance prices among companies before renewing your policy. However, recognize that your driving record will follow you. If you recently caused one or more accidents, you will likely be charged a higher premium whether you continue with your existing insurance company or switch to a new company.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt is about to renew her car insurance policy. She has a perfect driving record and a safe but inexpensive car, and her annual mileage is very low. All of these factors allow her to pay a relatively low insurance premium. She is considering two policies. Policy A is 100/300/50, which means that the liability coverage is limited to $100,000 per person injured in an accident, $300,000 maximum per accident, and $50,000 to cover damage to the other vehicle or other property. The policy has collision and comprehensive coverage with a deductible of $200. The annual premium for this policy is $1,500. Policy B has liability coverage of 60/100/20 and an annual premium of $1,060. Stephanie prefers Policy A because it has better coverage than Policy B, but she does not want to pay $1,500 for insurance.

Stephanie’s insurance agent tells her that if she increases her deductible from $200 to $900, she could reduce the annual premium for Policy A to $1,100, which is $400 less than the $1,500 premium quoted for the same policy with a $200 deductible. She decides to increase her deductible to $900. She is willing to take a little more risk in order to reduce her insurance premium because she believes that she is not likely to be involved in an auto accident.
If You Are in an Auto Accident
If you are in an auto accident, contact the police immediately. Request information from the other driver(s) in the accident, including their insurance information. You may also obtain contact information (including license plate numbers) from witnesses, just in case they leave before the police arrive. Make sure that you can validate whatever information other drivers provide. Some drivers who believe they are at fault and do not have insurance may attempt to give you a fake name and leave before the police arrive. Take pictures of any evidence that may prove that you were not at fault. Write down the details of how the accident happened while they are fresh in your mind. Ask for a copy of the police report.

File a claim with your insurance company immediately. Your insurance company will review the police report and may contact witnesses. It will also verify that your insurance policy is still in effect and determine whether the repairs and medical treatment will be covered based on your policy’s provisions. The insurance policy may specify some guidelines for having your car repaired, such as obtaining at least two estimates before you have repairs done. A claims adjuster employed by the insurance company may investigate the accident details and attempt to determine how much you should be paid.

Once you incur expenses, such as car repair or medical expenses, send this information along with receipts to the insurance company. The insurance company will respond by reimbursing you for the portion of the expenses covered under your policy. It may provide full or partial reimbursement. Alternatively, it may state that some or all of your expenses are not covered by your policy.

If your insurance company believes that the other driver is at fault, it should seek damages from the other driver’s insurance company. If the other driver is not insured, your insurance company will pay your claim if you have uninsured or underinsured motorist insurance. If your claim is denied by your insurance company and you still believe that the other driver is at fault, you may need to file a claim against the other driver or the other driver’s insurance company. This is also the case when an injured party seeks damages greater than those offered by their policy.
Homeowner’s Insurance Provisions
Homeowner’s insurance provides insurance in the event of property damage, theft, or personal liability relating to home ownership. It not only protects the most valuable asset for many individuals but also limits their potential liabilities (expenses) associated with the home. Premiums on homeowner’s insurance are commonly paid yearly or may be included in your mortgage payment.

homeowner’s insurance
A policy that provides insurance in the event of property damage, theft, or personal liability relating to your home.

Financial loss due to the ownership of a home could occur due to a wide variety of adverse events, ranging from a flood to burglary. The cost of covering claims due to fire, lightning, wind, hail, and water damage represents almost half of all expenses incurred by homeowner’s insurance companies.

Homeowner’s (HO) insurance is structured in different packages, distinguished by the degree of coverage. After selecting the package that you prefer, you can request additional provisions for the policy to fit your particular needs. Eight packages are summarized in Exhibit 11.5. Notice that HO-1, HO-2, HO-3, HO-5, and HO-8 focus on insurance for the home. The higher the number, the greater the coverage, and the higher the premium that would be paid for a given home. Two packages, HO-4 and HO-6, provide renter’s insurance and insurance for condominium owners, respectively. HO-7 provides insurance for mobile homes.

Exhibit 11.5 Types of Perils Protected by Homeowner’s (HO) Insurance Policies

Figure 11.5 Full Alternative Text
A homeowner’s insurance policy typically provides coverage of property damage and protection from personal liability. As shown in Exhibit 11.5, the specific details regarding the coverage vary among homeowner’s insurance policies. Most homeowner’s insurance policies focus on the following types of coverage.
Property Damage
The homeowner’s policy covers damage to the home. The specific provisions of the policy explain the degree of coverage. A cash value policy pays you for the value of the damaged property after considering its depreciation (wear and tear). A replacement cost policy pays you for the actual cost of replacing the damaged property. A replacement cost policy is preferable, because the actual cost of replacing damaged property is normally higher than the assessed value of the property. For example, assume a home was valued at $200,000 and was then completely destroyed. A cash value policy would provide insurance coverage of $200,000, even though the cost of rebuilding (replacing) the home could be $250,000 or more. In contrast, the replacement cost policy would insure the home for its replacement cost and therefore would cover the entire cost of repairing the damage up to a limit specified in the homeowner’s policy. A policy typically specifies a deductible, or an amount that you would need to pay for damage before the insurance coverage is applied.

cash value policy
A policy that pays you for the value of the damaged property after considering its depreciation.

replacement cost policy
A policy that pays you for the actual cost of replacing the damaged property.

Minimum Limit
Many insurers require that your homeowner’s insurance policy cover at least 80% of the full replacement cost. The financial institution that provides your mortgage loan will likely require homeowner’s insurance coverage that would at least cover your mortgage. In most cases, you would want more insurance than is required by the mortgage lender. You should have sufficient insurance not only to cover the mortgage loan balance but also to replace the property and all personal assets that are damaged.

Other Structures on Property
The homeowner’s insurance policy also specifies whether separate structures such as a garage, shed, or swimming pool are covered and the maximum amount of coverage. Trees and shrubs are usually included with a specified maximum amount of coverage. A deductible may be applied to these other structures.

Personal Property
A policy normally covers personal assets such as furniture, computers, or clothing up to some specified maximum amount. For example, a policy may specify that all personal assets such as furniture and clothing are covered up to a specific level, such as $40,000. Standard homeowner’s insurance policies limit the coverage of personal property to no more than one-half of the coverage of the dwelling. A deductible may also be applied to the personal property.

A home inventory includes detailed information about your personal property that can be used when filing a claim. Create a list of all your personal assets and estimate the market value of each of them. Use a phone or video camera to film your personal assets in your home for proof of their existence. Keep the list and the video file in a safe place outside your home, so that you have access to them even if your home is destroyed.

home inventory
An inventory that contains detailed information about your personal property that can be used when filing a claim.

Personal Property Replacement Cost Coverage
Many homeowner’s policies cover personal property for their cash value. For example, if a home entertainment system priced at $5,000 three years ago is assumed to have a life of five years, it would have used up three-fifths of its life. Based on this amount of depreciation, the insurer will pay you the cash value of $2,000. Yet if this home entertainment system was destroyed in a fire, you might need to spend $6,000 to replace it.

Just as the dwelling can be insured at replacement cost rather than cash value, so can personal assets. This provision will increase your insurance premium slightly, but it may be worthwhile if you have personal assets that have a high replacement cost.

Personal Property Floater
Some personal assets are very valuable but are not fully covered by your homeowner’s policy. You may need to obtain a personal property floater (also called personal articles floater), which is an extension of the homeowner’s insurance policy that allows you to itemize your valuables. For example, if you have very expensive computer equipment or jewelry in your home, you may purchase this additional insurance to protect those specific assets. An alternative type is an unscheduled personal property floater, which protects all of your personal property.
personal property floater
An extension of the homeowner’s insurance policy that allows you to itemize your valuables.

Home Office Provision
Assets in a home office such as a personal computer are not covered in many standard homeowner’s policies. You can request a home office provision, which will require a higher premium. Alternatively, you could purchase a separate policy to cover the home office.

Liability
The policy specifies coverage if you are sued as the result of an event that occurs in your home or on your property. Normally, you are responsible for an injury to other persons while they are on your property. For example, if a neighbor falls down the steps of your home and sues you, your policy would likely cover you. Your liability exposure is not tied to the value of your home. Even if you have a small home with a low value, you need to protect yourself against liability. Some insurance companies provide minimum coverage of $100,000 against liability. However, a higher level of coverage, such as $300,000, is commonly recommended. The coverage includes the court costs and awards granted as a result of lawsuits against you due to injuries on your property.

Other Types of Provisions
Many other possible provisions could be included in a policy to cover a wide variety of circumstances. For example, if an event such as a fire forces you to live away from home, you will incur additional living expenses. A loss-of-use provision specifies whether your policy covers these expenses and, if so, the maximum amount of coverage.
Homeowner’s Insurance Premiums
Homeowner’s insurance premiums have risen in recent years. This section describes the factors that influence the premium charged and explains how you can reduce your premium.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.nerdwallet.com

To get
An estimate of the homeowner’s insurance premium that you would need to pay based on your personalized home information.

Factors That Affect Homeowner’s Insurance Premiums
Your homeowner’s insurance premium is influenced by the likelihood that you will submit claims to the insurance company and the cost to the insurance company of covering those claims. The premium you pay for homeowner’s insurance is primarily dependent on the following factors:

VALUE OF INSURED HOME. Insurance premiums reflect the value of the insured home and therefore are higher for more expensive homes.

DEDUCTIBLE. A higher deductible reduces the amount of coverage provided by the homeowner’s insurance and therefore results in a lower insurance premium.

LOCATION. The potential for damage due to weather conditions is greater in some areas, and therefore the premiums are higher as well. For example, homes along the Gulf Coast are more likely to be damaged by a hurricane than homes located 40 miles inland. Home insurance rates are therefore much higher along the coast. Similarly, premiums will be higher for homes in locations prone to tornadoes, floods, or earthquakes. Exhibit 11.6 illustrates how average insurance premiums can vary among states. Notice that coastal states that are most exposed to hurricanes (Florida and Texas) and states with a high likelihood of tornadoes (Oklahoma) have higher premiums than other states.

DEGREE OF PROTECTION. If you want protection against an earthquake on a home in California, you must pay a higher premium. If you want protection against a flood, you may need to buy an additional insurance policy.

DISCOUNTS. You may obtain discounts on your insurance by maintaining a smoke detector system in your home, paying for your insurance in one lump sum, or purchasing multiple types of insurance (such as auto, health, and life) from the same insurer.

Exhibit 11.6 Comparison of Average Home Insurance Premiums Among U.S. States

Source: Bankrate.

Figure 11.6 Full Alternative Text
Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.insurance.com

To get
Answers to many important questions concerning homeowner’s insurance.
Reducing Your Homeowner’s Insurance Premium
Consider the following actions you can take to reduce your homeowner’s insurance premium.

Increase Your Deductible
If you are willing to pay a higher deductible, you can reduce your premium. For example, if you use a deductible of $2,000, you may be able to reduce your premium by about 20% or more.

Improve Protection
If you improve the protection of your home, your insurance premium will decline. For example, you could install storm shutters to protect against bad weather or a security system to protect against burglary.

Use One Insurer for All Types of Insurance
Some insurance companies offer lower premiums to customers who purchase more than one type of insurance from them.

Stay with the Same Insurance Company
When you stay with the same insurance company, you may be rewarded with a lower insurance premium.

Shop Around
As with auto insurance, you may be able to reduce your homeowner’s insurance premium by obtaining quotations from various insurance companies. The insurance premium can vary substantially among insurers.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Homeowner’s Insurance Information
Application
The Gabi Car & Home Insurance app (by Gabi Personal Insurance Agency, Inc.) helps you compare homeowner’s insurance premium quotations from several major insurance companies, based on personalized information that you enter.

To Find It
Search for the Gabi insurance app on your mobile device.

Filing a Claim
If your property is damaged, you should contact your insurance company immediately. A claims adjuster from your insurance company will estimate the damage and the cost of repairing the damage done to your home, which will determine the compensation for your damaged property. The insurance company may be willing to issue a check so that you can hire someone to do the repairs. You should consider obtaining an independent estimate on the repairs to ensure that the amount the insurance company offers you is sufficient. If the insurance company’s estimate is too low, you can appeal it.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt is reviewing her homeowner’s insurance policy, which is shown in Exhibit 11.7, to determine whether she should change her policy once her existing one expires. She may consider increasing her deductible, because this would allow her to incur a lower insurance premium. When her homeowner’s policy is near expiration, she plans to obtain a home insurance quote from her auto insurance company, because that company also provides home insurance. She hopes that she might be able to receive a discount if she obtains both types of insurance from one insurance company.
Exhibit 11.7 Stephanie Spratt’s Homeowner’s Insurance Policy

Figure 11.7 Full Alternative Text
Renter’s Insurance
Renter’s insurance insures your possessions within a house, condo, or apartment that you are renting. It does not insure the structure itself because the insurance is for the renter only, not the owner of the property. It covers personal assets such as furniture, televisions, computer equipment, and audio equipment. The insurance protects against damage due to weather or the loss of personal assets due to burglary. It can cover living expenses while the rental property is being repaired. It also covers liability if someone is injured while on the rental property.

renter’s insurance
A policy that covers your possessions within a house, condo, or apartment that you are renting.

Renters whose personal assets have a high market value need renter’s insurance to protect those assets. Even renters without valuable personal assets may desire renter’s insurance to protect against liability.

Renter’s Insurance Policy Provisions
Renter’s insurance specifies the maximum amount of coverage for your personal assets. It may also specify maximum coverage for specific items such as jewelry. The insurance premium is dependent on the amount of coverage you desire. Your renter’s insurance may also cover liability resulting from injury to a person while on your premises. For example, if your pet injures a neighbor in your yard, your renter’s insurance may cover your liability up to a limit. Because renter’s insurance policies vary, you should closely review any policy to ensure that the insurance coverage is appropriate.
Umbrella Personal Liability Policy
You can supplement your auto and homeowner’s insurance with an umbrella personal liability policy, which provides additional personal liability coverage.

umbrella personal liability policy
A supplement to auto and homeowner’s insurance that provides additional personal liability coverage.

This type of policy is intended to provide additional insurance, not to replace the other policies. In fact, the insurance will not be provided unless you show proof of existing insurance coverage. Umbrella policies are especially useful when you have personal assets beyond a car and home that you wish to protect from liability. You may be able to purchase an umbrella policy for about $300 per year for coverage of $1 million.
How Insurance Fits within Your Financial Plan
The following are the key decisions about auto and homeowner’s insurance that should be included in your financial plan:

Do you have adequate insurance to protect your wealth?

How much insurance should you plan to have in the future?

Exhibit 11.8 provides an example of how auto and homeowner’s insurance decisions apply to Stephanie Spratt’s financial plan.

Exhibit 11.8 How Auto and Homeowner’s Insurance Fit within Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Plan

Figure 11.8 Full Alternative Text
Discussion Questions
How would Stephanie’s auto and homeowner’s insurance purchasing decisions be different if she were a single mother of two children?

How would Stephanie’s auto and homeowner’s insurance purchasing decisions be affected if she were 35 years old? If she were 50 years old?
Summary
RISK MANAGEMENT. The term risk can be defined as exposure to events (or perils) that can cause a financial loss. Your risk management decisions determine whether and how to protect against risk. Your alternatives are to avoid risk, reduce risk, accept risk, or insure against risk. Some types of risk are difficult to avoid and dangerous to accept. For these types of risk, insurance is needed. Once you decide whether to obtain a particular type of insurance, you must decide on the amount of coverage and where to purchase the insurance.

ROLE OF INSURANCE COMPANIES. Insurance companies provide insurance that can protect you from major financial losses. Property and casualty insurance is used to insure property and therefore consists primarily of auto insurance and home insurance. Some insurance companies specialize in a particular type of insurance, while others offer all types of insurance for individuals.

AUTO INSURANCE. Automobile insurance insures against damage to your automobile and expenses associated with an accident. It includes liability coverage, medical payments coverage, uninsured or underinsured motorist coverage, and collision and comprehensive coverage (damage to your car).

AUTO INSURANCE PREMIUM. The higher the value of your car and the lower your deductible, the higher your auto insurance premium will be. In addition, personal characteristics such as young age, more mileage driven, a highly populated location, and a poor credit history result in a higher auto insurance premium.

IF YOU ARE IN AN AUTO ACCIDENT. If you are in an auto accident, contact the police immediately, and obtain insurance information from the other driver(s). Ask for a copy of the police report. File a claim with your insurance company immediately.

HOMEOWNER’S INSURANCE. A homeowner’s insurance policy provides coverage of property damage and protection from personal liability. Policies specify whether the property coverage is based on a cash value versus the cost of replacement and whether other structures on the property are covered.

HOMEOWNER’S INSURANCE PREMIUM. The premium paid for homeowner’s insurance is dependent on the home’s value, the deductible, and the likelihood of damage to the home. In general, the higher the value of the home and the lower your deductible, the higher your home insurance premium will be.

RENTER’S INSURANCE. Renter’s insurance insures your possessions within a house, condo, or apartment that you are renting. It covers personal assets and protects against damage due to weather or the loss of personal assets due to burglary.

UMBRELLA PERSONAL LIABILITY POLICY. You can supplement your auto and homeowner’s insurance with an umbrella personal liability policy, which provides additional personal liability coverage. Umbrella policies are especially useful when you have personal assets beyond a car and home that you wish to protect.

HOW INSURANCE FITS WITHIN YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Many people identify a home and a car as key purchases to be made within their financial plan. You need insurance to protect these assets against major losses that could occur, so you can ultimately complete your financial plan and achieve your financial goals.
Review Questions
PURPOSE OF INSURANCE. What is the purpose of insurance? What is meant by the term liability? How can individuals benefit from insurance?

RISK MANAGEMENT. What is risk? What is risk management? How does insurance fit into risk management?

RISK AVOIDANCE. What does it mean to avoid risk? How can you apply this knowledge to your personal situation?

INSURANCE PREMIUM. What is an insurance premium? Why do premiums vary?

INSURANCE COMPANY OPERATIONS. What is the responsibility of the insurance company that sells you a policy? What is the relationship between insurance company claims and premiums paid by policyholders?

INSURANCE UNDERWRITERS. What is the role of insurance underwriters?

INSURANCE AGENTS. What is an insurance agent? What is the difference between a captive agent and an independent agent?

LIABILITY COVERAGE. Describe the two components of liability coverage in an auto insurance policy.

POLICY LIMITS. What do policy limits of 25/50/25 mean? Do you think the minimum amounts of liability insurance required by your state are suitable for all drivers? Explain your answer.

NO-FAULT AUTO INSURANCE. What is a no-fault auto insurance program? How does no-fault insurance affect personal injury litigation?

MEDICAL PAYMENTS COVERAGE. How does medical payments coverage under an auto insurance policy work? Why is medical payments coverage valuable even if you have a good health insurance plan?

AUTO INSURANCE COVERAGE. Describe collision and comprehensive coverage. Is this type of coverage required by most states? Who may require this type of coverage?

AUTO INSURANCE PREMIUM. List and briefly discuss factors that will affect your auto insurance premium.

CAR ACCIDENT. What steps should you take if you are in a car accident?

UNINSURED MOTORIST COVERAGE. What is uninsured motorist coverage? Why is this coverage necessary?

HOMEOWNER’S INSURANCE. What is homeowner’s insurance? How are the premiums normally paid?

TYPES OF HOMEOWNER’S INSURANCE. List and briefly describe the various HO insurance policies that focus on insurance for the home.

CASH VALUE INSURANCE. What is a “cash value” homeowner’s policy? What is a “replacement cost” homeowner’s policy?

PERSONAL PROPERTY INSURANCE. Is personal property typically insured under a homeowner’s insurance policy? If so, are there limits to the coverage of personal property? What is a home inventory?

PERSONAL PROPERTY FLOATER. What is a personal property floater? What are some common items homeowners add floaters to cover?

HOMEOWNER INSURANCE PREMIUM. List and briefly describe some of the factors that affect homeowner’s insurance premiums.

REDUCING HOME INSURANCE PREMIUMS. What are some steps you could take to reduce your homeowner’s insurance premium?

FILING A CLAIM. Describe the steps you would take to file a claim on your homeowner’s insurance.

RENTER’S INSURANCE. How is renter’s insurance different from homeowner’s insurance? Who should consider purchasing renter’s insurance? Briefly describe some of the provisions of a renter’s insurance policy.

UMBRELLA POLICY. What is the purpose of an umbrella personal liability policy? Who might need one?

FINANCIAL STRENGTH OF THE INSURANCE COMPANY. How can you determine the financial strength of an insurance company? Why is this important to you as a consumer?

RISK REDUCTION. List some ways you can reduce risk and limit your overall exposure to loss.

PSYCHOLOGY AND RISK. Why do some people choose to accept risk rather than purchase insurance? Why is this mindset problematic?

GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION AND INSURANCE COSTS. Why does your geographic location impact the cost of homeowner’s insurance? Why does it impact the cost of your automobile insurance?

CREDIT HISTORY AND INSURANCE. How does your credit history impact your insurance costs?

HOME INVENTORY. Why is it important to keep a detailed inventory of your household possessions outside your home?

POLICY COVERAGES. Why is it important to carefully review the types of perils covered by your homeowner’s insurance policy? What are some common perils that are not covered by many homeowner’s policies?

ETHICAL DILEMMA. You teach a personal finance class at a local community college. The state in which you teach requires proof of liability insurance to renew your license plates.

During the discussion of this topic in class, several students admit that they obtain a liability policy just before the renewal of their license plates and then cancel it immediately thereafter. They do this because they know that the state has no system for following up on the cancellation of the liability policies once the license plates are issued. These students, who are out of work as a result of a local plant shutdown, say that they cannot afford to maintain the insurance, but they must have access to cars for transportation.

Discuss whether you consider the conduct of the students to be ethical or not.

How does the conduct of these students potentially affect other members of the class who maintain liability insurance on their vehicles?
