Chapter 20Estate Planning

NotarYES/Shutterstock

Ever since James was a child, he wanted to help support charities. When he graduated from college, his busy career limited the amount of time he could devote to philanthropy. However, he promised himself that he would donate a large amount of money to his favorite charities someday. He was not married and did not have any children. James lived very conservatively and accumulated considerable wealth over time. He wanted to have his estate distributed among several charities that focused on improving the lives of children with no parents. However, he did not have a will.

A month ago, James died unexpectedly. His only surviving family member was a brother, but he and James were estranged and had not communicated with each other for years. Nevertheless, the state law determined that James’s entire estate was to be distributed to his brother. None of the wealth that James had accumulated over the years was given to his favorite charities because he did not have a will to document how he wanted his estate to be distributed.

Estate planning is important because it ensures that your estate is distributed in the manner that you desire. In addition, proper planning may allow your estate to be legally insulated from taxes so that your entire estate can be distributed to your family members or other beneficiaries that you identify in your will.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Explain the purpose of a will.

Describe estate taxes.

Explain the use of trusts, gifts, and contributions.

Describe a living will and power of attorney.

Explain how estate planning fits within your financial plan.
Purpose of a Will
An estate consists of a deceased person’s assets after all debts are paid. At the time of a person’s death, the estate is distributed according to that person’s wishes. Estate planning is the act of planning how your wealth will be allocated on or before your death. One of the most important tasks in estate planning is the creation of a will, which is a legal request for how your estate should be distributed on your death. It can also identify a preferred guardian for any surviving children who are minors.

estate
The assets of a deceased person after all debts are paid.

estate planning
The act of planning for how your wealth will be allocated on or before your death.

will
A legal request for how your estate should be distributed on your death. It can also identify a preferred guardian for any surviving children.

Reasons for Having a Will
A will is critical to ensure that your estate is distributed in the manner that you desire. Once you have a positive net worth to be distributed on your death, you should consider creating a will. In your will, you can specify the persons you want to receive your estate, referred to as your beneficiaries (or heirs). If you die intestate (pronounced “in-TEH-stayt”; without a will), the court will appoint a person (called an administrator) to distribute your estate according to the laws of your state. In that case, one family member may receive more than you intended, while others receive less. Having an administrator also results in additional costs being imposed on the estate.

beneficiaries (heirs)
The persons specified in a will to receive a part of an estate.

intestate
The condition of dying without a will.

Furthermore, if there is no surviving spouse, the administrator will also decide who will assume responsibility for any children, and that might not be the person you would have chosen. For example, you might want your best friend to be your children’s guardian because you and your friend have similar ideas on child-rearing, but the administrator may choose your sister, who has a very different approach to raising children.

Even if you have no children, you might still benefit from having a will. Perhaps you have some personal property, such as a baseball card collection or jewelry, that you would like to leave to specific friends or relatives. With a will, you can ensure that they will receive that property. In addition, a will can prevent arguments after your death if several of your relatives want the same assets.

Creating a Valid Will
To create a valid will, you must be at least the minimum age, usually 18 or 21, depending on the state where you live. You must also be mentally competent and should not be subject to undue influence (threats) from others. A will is more likely to be challenged by potential heirs if there is some question about your competence or whether you were forced to designate one or more beneficiaries in the will. Some states require that the will be typed, although handwritten wills are accepted in other states. To be valid, a will must be dated and signed. Two or three witnesses who do not inherit anything under the will must also witness the signing of the will.

When creating a will, you must comply with many different laws, which can vary by state and change over time. Thus, while you can learn some of the basic principles for creating a will in this chapter, you may still benefit from discussing your will with an attorney in your state who has expertise in this specific field.

Key Components of a Will
A sample will is provided in Exhibit 20.1 The key components of a will are described next.
Exhibit 20.1 A Sample Will
Figure 20.1 Full Alternative Text
Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.estateplanning.com

To get
Guidance on estate planning.

Distribution of the Estate
The will details how the estate should be distributed among the beneficiaries. Because you do not know what your estate will be worth, you may specify your desired distribution according to percentages of the estate. For example, you could specify that two people each receive 50% of the estate. Alternatively, you could specify that one person receive a specific dollar amount and that the other person receive the remainder of the estate.

Executor
In your will, you name an executor (also called a personal representative) to carry out your instructions regarding how your assets will be distributed. An executor may be required to collect any money owed to the estate, pay off any debts owed by the estate, sell specific assets (such as a home) that are part of the estate, and then distribute the proceeds as specified in the will. The executor must notify everyone who has an interest or potential interest in the estate. Most people select a family member, a friend, a business associate, a bank trust company employee, or an attorney as an executor. You should select an executor who would serve your interests in distributing the assets as specified in your will, who is capable of handling the process, and who is sufficiently organized to complete the process in a timely manner.

executor (personal representative)
The person designated in a will to execute your instructions regarding the distribution of your assets.

The executor must be a U.S. citizen, may not be a minor or convicted felon, and, under some states’ laws, must reside in the same state as the person creating the will. The executor is entitled to be paid by the estate for services provided, but some executors elect not to charge the estate.

Guardian
If you are a parent of at least one minor child, you should name a guardian who will be assigned the responsibility of caring for the children and managing any estate left to the children. You should ensure that the person you select as guardian is willing to serve in this capacity. Your will may specify an amount of money to be distributed to the guardian to care for the children.

Signature
Your signature is needed to validate the will and ensure that someone else does not create a fake will.

Letter of Last Instruction
You may also wish to prepare a letter of last instruction. This describes your preferences regarding funeral arrangements and indicates where you have stored any key financial documents such as mortgage and insurance contracts.

letter of last instruction
A supplement to a will that can describe your preferences regarding funeral arrangements and indicate where you have stored any key financial documents.

Changing Your Will
You may need to change your will if you move to a different state because state laws regarding wills vary. If you get married or divorced after creating your will, you may also need to change it. You may also want to change your will after a child is born or someone in your family dies.

If you wish to make major changes to your will, you will probably need to create a new will. The new will must specify that you are revoking your previous will so that you do not have multiple wills with conflicting instructions. When you wish to make only minor revisions to your will, you can add a codicil (pronounced “KAH-duh-sill”), which is a document that specifies changes to your existing will.

codicil
A document that specifies changes in an existing will.
Executing the Will during Probate
Probate is a legal process that ensures that when people die, their assets are distributed as they wish, and the guardianship of children is assigned as they wish. The purpose of the probate process is for the court to declare a will valid and ensure the orderly distribution of assets. To start the probate process, the executor files forms in a local probate court, provides a copy of the will, provides a list of the assets and debts of the deceased person, pays debts, and sells any assets that need to be liquidated. The executor typically opens a bank account for the estate that is used to pay the debts of the deceased and to deposit proceeds from liquidating the assets. If the executor does not have time or is otherwise unable to perform these tasks, an attorney can be hired to complete them. Most states have a simplified probate process for small estates, but the rules vary from state to state.

probate
A legal process that declares a will valid and ensures the orderly distribution of assets.
Estate Taxes
An estate may be subject to taxes before it is distributed to the beneficiaries. When a person dies and has a surviving spouse who jointly owned all the assets, the spouse becomes the sole owner of the estate. In this case, the estate is not subject to taxes. If there is no surviving spouse and the estate is to be distributed to the children or other beneficiaries, the estate is subject to taxes. The estate taxes are assessed after the value of the estate is determined during the probate process. You should estimate the estate taxes based on your net worth so that you can take steps to minimize the tax liability on your death.

For large estates, a traditional marital share will distributes half of the estate to the spouse and the other half to any children or to a trust (discussed later in the chapter). This type of will is useful for minimizing taxes on the estate.

traditional marital share will
A will suitable for larger estates that distributes half of the estate to the spouse and the other half to any children or to a trust.

Determining Estate Taxes
The estate’s value is equal to the value of all the assets minus any existing liabilities (including a mortgage) and funeral and administrative expenses. Life insurance proceeds from policies owned by the deceased are included in the estate and therefore may be subject to estate taxes.

A specified portion of an estate is exempt from federal estate taxes. In 2023, approximately $12.9 million of an estate could be distributed to children or others tax-free. Thus, a married couple could each pass $12.9 million to their children without tax. Beyond this limit, a federal estate tax is imposed with a top rate of 40%.

Some states impose inheritance taxes or state excise taxes on an estate. To avoid state taxes on an estate, residents of such states sometimes retire in other states that do not impose them.
Trusts, Gifts, and Contributions
Estate planning commonly involves trusts, gifts, and contributions to avoid estate taxes. You may consider hiring an attorney to complete the proper documents.

Trusts
A trust is a legal document in which one person (called a grantor) transfers assets to another person (called a trustee), who manages the assets for designated beneficiaries. The grantor must select a trustee who is capable of managing the assets being transferred. Various types of investment firms can be hired to serve as trustees.

trust
A legal document in which one person (the grantor) transfers assets to another (the trustee), who manages them for designated beneficiaries.

grantor
The person who creates a trust.

trustee
The person or institution named in a trust to manage the trust assets for the beneficiaries.

Living Trusts
A living trust is a trust in which you assign the management of your assets to a trustee while you are living. You identify a trustee who you want to manage the assets (which includes making decisions on how to invest cash until it is needed or how to spend cash).

living trust
A trust in which you assign the management of your assets to a trustee while you are living.

Revocable Living Trust
With a revocable living trust, you can dissolve or revoke the trust at any time because you are still the legal owner of the assets. For example, you may revoke a living trust if you decide that you want to manage the assets yourself. Alternatively, you may revoke a living trust so that you can replace the trustee. In this case, you would create a new living trust with a newly identified trustee.

revocable living trust
A living trust that can be dissolved.

By using a revocable living trust, you can avoid the probate process. You are still the legal owner of the assets, however, so you do not avoid estate taxes. The assets are still considered part of your estate.

Irrevocable Living Trust
An irrevocable living trust is a living trust that cannot be changed. This type of trust is a separate entity. It can provide income for you, but the assets in the trust are no longer legally yours. The assets are not considered part of your estate and therefore are not subject to estate taxes on your death.

irrevocable living trust
A living trust that cannot be changed, although it can provide income to the grantor.

Standard Family Trust
A standard family trust (also called a credit-shelter trust) is a trust established for children in a family. The standard family trust is just one of many types of testamentary trusts, or trusts created by wills. It is a popular type of trust because it can be used to avoid estate taxes in a manner somewhat similar to the irrevocable living trust, except that it is not structured as a living trust.
standard family trust (credit-shelter trust)
A trust established for children in a family.

testamentary trust
A trust created by a will.

Gifts
From an estate planning perspective, a gift is a tax-free distribution of funds from one person to another. As of 2023, the law allows up to $17,000 to pass by gift per year. The maximum amount of the gift allowed will increase over time with inflation.

gift
A tax-free distribution of up to $17,000 per year (as of 2023) from one person to another.

If your goal is to ultimately pass on your estate to your children but you are concerned about estate taxes, you can reduce the size of your estate by giving $17,000 tax-free to each of your children each year. The recipient does not have to report the gift as income; therefore, it is not subject to taxes. If you are married, you and your spouse can give $34,000 ($17,000 from each of you) to each of your children. Thus, a married couple with three children may give a total of $102,000 (computed as 
3
×
$
34,000
) in gifts to their children every year. Over a five-year period, the couple could give $510,000 (computed as 
5
 years
×
$
102,000
 per year
) to their three children without any tax consequences to the parents or the children. Such gifts are especially important for people whose estate value exceeds the tax-free limit. Frequent gifts may enable the parents to ensure that their estate falls under the tax-free limit by the time of their death.

Contributions to Charitable Organizations
Many individuals wish to leave a portion of their estate to charitable organizations. Any money donated from an estate to charitable organizations is not subject to estate taxes. Consider an estate worth $200,000 more than the prevailing tax-free limit. If this entire estate is passed on to family members or other individuals, $200,000 of the estate will be subject to estate taxes. If $200,000 is donated to charitable organizations, however, none of the estate will be subject to estate taxes. Many individuals plan to leave donations for charitable organizations regardless of the tax implications, but it is nonetheless important to recognize the tax benefits.
Other Aspects of Estate Planning
In addition to wills and trusts, estate planning also involves some other key decisions regarding a living will and power of attorney.

Living Will
A living will, also known as an advance directive, is a legal document in which individuals specify their preferences if they become mentally or physically disabled. For example, many individuals have a living will that expresses their desire not to be placed on life support if they become terminally ill. In this case, a living will also has financial implications, because an estate could be charged with large medical bills resulting from life support. In this way, those who do not want to be kept alive by life support can ensure that their estate is used in the way that they prefer.

living will
A legal document in which individuals specify their preferences if they become mentally or physically disabled.

Power of Attorney
A power of attorney is a legal document granting a person the power to make specific decisions for you if you are incapable. For example, you may name a family member or a close friend to make your investment and housing decisions if you become ill. You should name someone who you believe would act to serve your interests.

power of attorney
A legal document granting a person the power to make specific decisions for you if you are incapable.

A durable power of attorney for health care is a legal document granting a person the power to make specific health care decisions for you. A durable power of attorney ensures that the person you identify has the power to make specific decisions regarding your health care if you become incapacitated. Although a living will states many of your preferences, a situation may arise that is not covered by your living will. A durable power of attorney for health care means that the necessary decisions will be made by someone who knows your preferences, rather than by a health care facility.

durable power of attorney for health care
A legal document granting a person the power to make specific health care decisions for you.

Maintaining Estate Plan Documents
Key documents such as your will, living will, and power of attorney should be kept in a safe, accessible place. You should tell the person (or people) you named as executor(s) and granted power of attorney where you keep these documents so that they can be retrieved if and when they are needed.

Here is a checklist of the important documents that you should keep together:

Estate planning information, such as a will, living will, and power of attorney

Life insurance policies and other insurance policies

Retirement account information

Home ownership and mortgage information

Ownership of other real estate

Personal property, such as cars or jewelry owned

Personal loans

Credit card debt information

Ownership of businesses

Personal legal documents

The most recent personal tax returns

Bank account information

Investment information

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.nolo.com

To get
Guidance on creating a will and other functions of estate planning.
How Estate Planning Fits into Your Financial Plan
The following are the key decisions about estate planning that should be included in your financial plan:

Should you create a will?

Do you need to establish a trust?

Should you create a living will or designate an individual to have power of attorney?

Exhibit 20.2 provides an example of how estate planning decisions apply to Stephanie Spratt’s financial plan.

Exhibit 20.2 How Estate Planning Fits into Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Plan

Figure 20.2 Full Alternative Text
Discussion Questions
How would Stephanie’s estate planning decisions be different if she were a single mother of two children?

How would Stephanie’s estate planning decisions be affected if she were 35 years old? If she were 50 years old?
Summary
PURPOSE OF A WILL. A will is intended to make sure that your preferences are carried out after your death. It allows you to distribute your estate, select a guardian for your children, and select an executor to ensure that the will is executed properly.

ESTATE TAXES. Estate taxes are imposed on estates that exceed a tax-free limit. This limit has changed over time. In 2023 it was approximately $12.9 million.

TRUSTS, GIFTS, AND CONTRIBUTIONS. Estate planning involves the use of trusts, gifts, and charitable contributions. Trusts can be structured so that a large estate can be passed on to the beneficiaries without being subject to estate taxes. Gifts are tax-free payments that can be made annually; they allow parents to pass on part of their wealth to their children every year. By making annual gifts, parents may reduce their wealth so that when they die, their estate will not be subject to estate taxes. An estate’s contributions to charity are not subject to estate taxes.

LIVING WILL AND POWER OF ATTORNEY. If you someday might be incapable of making decisions relating to your health and financial situation, you should consider creating a living will and power of attorney now. A living will is a legal document that allows you to specify your health treatment preferences, such as the wish that you do not want to be placed on life support. The power of attorney is a legal document that allows you to assign a person the power to make specific decisions for you if and when you no longer can make these decisions.

HOW ESTATE PLANNING FITS INTO YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Estate planning fits into your financial plan because it helps prepare for the financial support of family members or loved ones. It is one way you can ensure that the wealth you accumulated is properly directed to the people who you intended to receive it.
Review Questions
ESTATE PLANNING. What is an estate? What is estate planning? What is the main goal of estate planning?

WILLS. What is a will? Why is a will important? What does it mean to die intestate?

BENEFICIARY. What is a beneficiary? Why is it important to be specific about beneficiaries and assets in your will?

VALID WILL. List the requirements for a valid will.

TYPES OF WILLS. Describe the purpose of a traditional marital share will.

COMPONENTS OF A WILL. List and briefly discuss the key components of a will.

EXECUTOR. What is an executor? Why is it important to name an executor in your will?

LETTER OF LAST INSTRUCTION. What is typically covered in a letter of last instruction?

CHANGING A WILL. When would you change your will? How can your will be changed?

PROBATE. What is probate? Describe the probate process.

ESTATE TAXES. Discuss estate taxes. When is an estate subject to and not subject to estate taxes? What is the top federal estate tax rate? What other taxes may be levied against an estate?

VALUE OF ESTATE. How do you calculate the value of an estate?

ESTATE PLANNING. Beyond the will, what does estate planning involve?

TRUST. What is a trust? What is the difference between a living trust and a testamentary trust?

REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST. What is a revocable living trust? How can a revocable living trust be used to help your estate? How does a revocable living trust affect estate taxes?

IRREVOCABLE LIVING TRUST. What is an irrevocable living trust?

STANDARD FAMILY TRUST. What is a standard family trust? Give an illustration.

ESTATE PLANNING. How do gifts fit into estate planning?

CONTRIBUTIONS. How can contributions to charitable organizations help in estate planning?

LIVING WILL. What is a living will? What are its implications for estate planning?

POWER OF ATTORNEY. What is a power of attorney?

DURABLE POWER OF ATTORNEY. What is a durable power of attorney for healthcare? Why is it needed even if you have a living will?

ESTATE PLAN DOCUMENTS. How should estate plan documents be maintained?

TYPES OF ESTATE PLAN DOCUMENTS. List several important documents that are important for estate planning.

ESTATE TAXES. Jill just inherited several million dollars and some real estate from her grandfather. What steps should she take to determine how much she will owe in estate taxes?

GIFTS. How can you use annual gifts to reduce the tax burden on your heirs?

ESTATE PLANNING NEEDS. Lisa has an estate worth $3.21 million and three children who will receive her assets on her death. Should she create a will, given that her estate is worth less than the threshold that is exempt from estate taxes?

ETHICAL DILEMMA. Lakeeta’s Uncle Jeremiah was just diagnosed with terminal cancer and given less than two years to live. He has not accumulated any wealth during his lifetime, but he does have a life insurance policy with a $250,000 death benefit. He never married and does not have any children, so he approached Lakeeta with a proposition. If she would give him $150,000 now, he would put her down as his beneficiary on the life insurance policy so that she would receive the $250,000 death benefit when he passed away. If she does not accept the deal then the beneficiary of his life insurance policy will remain a children’s cancer research foundation. (NOTE: There is an industry built around this practice. Look up viatical settlements.)

What are the ethical considerations of this arrangement?

Discuss the benefits to Uncle Jeremiah of this arrangement.