Chapter 8Managing Your Credit

Diego Cervo/Shutterstock

When Tara graduated from college and started her first full-time job, she was on a tight budget. She determined that if she limited her spending, her salary would cover her expenses and allow her to save for a car. Tara decided to apply for a credit card so that she would be able to make emergency purchases, if necessary. Applying was easy, as every month or so she received notices from credit card companies offering her a credit card. When Tara received her card, with a credit limit of $4,000, she promised herself that she would use it only for emergency purchases between paychecks and that she would pay the balance in full every month. But six months later, her friends suggested that they all take a trip to Hawaii. Tara didn’t have enough cash to pay for the trip, so she charged $3,800 on her credit card. She couldn’t afford to pay the full balance on her card, but she didn’t think that was a problem because she had received an offer of another credit card that would charge zero interest if she transferred her balance to it. However, Tara didn’t read the fine print, which stated that the interest rate would rise to 18.5% after six months.

Two years and three additional credit cards later, Tara has accumulated $11,500 in credit card debt. She frequently used her credit cards for unnecessary purchases. She believed that as long as she made a payment each month, it didn’t matter that she quickly ran up charges to the limit because she could always get a new card and do a balance transfer. Each time she told herself that she would pay off the balance before the zero interest rate period expired, but each time she found it easier to just make the minimum payment, so soon she was paying 18.5% interest or higher on all her unpaid balances. Tara also didn’t realize that a fee and substantially higher interest are associated with cash advances and that she would be charged $35 for every late payment. Unskillful use of credit cards can cause unexpected financial problems. Now Tara has a poor credit rating, which will affect her ability to get a loan for the car that she needs. In addition, it may take her several years to pay off her credit card debt.

This chapter focuses on effectively using credit. A good credit history is built not by avoiding access to credit but by proving over time that you have good control over your credit.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Provide background information on credit cards.

Describe the use of credit cards by college students.

Explain credit repayment.

Describe how to review credit card statements.

Explain credit card regulations.

Offer tips on using credit cards.

Explain how managing your credit fits within your financial plan.
Background on Credit Cards
The easiest way to establish credit is to obtain a credit card, which allows you to purchase products on credit wherever that card is honored. You receive a monthly statement that identifies the purchases you made with the credit card during that period. Normally, credit cards are not used for very large expenditures such as cars or homes, but they are very convenient for smaller purchases, such as meals at restaurants, gasoline, clothing, car repairs, and even groceries.

Obtaining a credit card is easy, perhaps too easy. Credit card companies frequently send unsolicited offers of credit cards to consumers. Often the cards are preapproved. More than 70% of American consumers have at least one credit card, and many have two or more cards. About two-thirds of all undergraduate students have credit cards. There are more than 570 million credit card accounts in the United States, and more than 30 billion credit card transactions take place every year.

Advantages of Credit Cards
Credit cards offer three advantages. First, you can purchase products and services without carrying a large amount of cash or a checkbook. Second, as long as you pay off your balance each month, you receive free financing until the due date on your credit card statement. Third, you receive a monthly statement that contains a consolidated list of the purchases you made with the credit card, which enables you to keep track of your spending. In some cases, you receive an annual statement as well, detailing expenses by category, which can be useful in preparing your income tax return.

Disadvantages of Credit Cards
The main disadvantage of having a credit card is that it allows you to make purchases that you cannot afford. Therefore, it gives you the opportunity to spend beyond your means.

Example
Mia sees a 55-inch television with exciting new features that is priced at $2,000. She already has a good TV, but it lacks some of the new features. She does not have the cash to pay for the TV, but the store gives her a new credit card. The sales clerk tells Mia that she does not have to pay any money for one year and that the interest rate is 1.5% per month. In Mia’s mind, 1.5% is close to zero, so she is willing to obtain the TV on credit. She does not read the application form, which states that the annual interest rate is 18%.

Exhibit 8.1 shows how the amount Mia owes on the TV will grow over the first 12 months. By the end of 10 months, Mia will owe $2,321, or $321 more than the price of the TV when she bought it. Had she put off buying the TV for one year, she might have been able to save enough money to pay for it with cash. In addition, prices of televisions (like many high-tech products) tend to decline over time as new models are introduced, so she might have been able to purchase the TV for about $1,500 if she waited a year. By the time she starts making payments on this TV, she may even be ready to buy another new TV.

Exhibit 8.1 How a Loan of $2,000 Grows over Time 
(Interest Rate
=
1.5
% per Month)

Figure 8.1 Full Alternative Text
The potential for overspending with credit cards is even more pronounced because of the financing available. As long as you make the minimum monthly payment, such spending can continue over time. The average credit card debt for cardholders who do not pay the entire balance each month is about $3,900. About 29 percent of all cardholders make only the minimum payment or a very low payment each month. As these people accumulate debt, the debt is subject to a high interest rate. Therefore, they will often struggle to pay off the debt over time.

Applying for a Credit Card
When you apply for a credit card, potential creditors obtain information from you and from credit bureaus so that they can assess your ability to repay credit.

Personal Information
When you apply for credit, you are asked to complete an application that typically requests the following information:

Cash inflows: What is your monthly income?

Cash outflows: How much do you spend per month?

Credit history: Have you borrowed funds in the past? Did you repay any previous loans in a timely manner?

Capital: Do you have any funds in the form of savings or stocks that can be used if necessary to cover future debt payments?

Collateral: Do you have any assets that can be used as collateral to secure the borrowed funds? (If you could not repay your debt, you could sell these assets to obtain the funds needed to repay the loans.)

Creditors generally prefer that you have a high level of cash inflows, a low level of cash outflows, a large amount of capital and collateral, and a good credit history. Nevertheless, they commonly extend credit to individuals who do not have all of these attributes. For example, credit card issuers recognize that individuals starting their first job after college may not earn much income. Nevertheless, they may still provide a limited amount of credit if they believe that the individuals are likely to repay it. Some creditors extend credit at higher interest rates to individuals who have a higher risk of defaulting.

Credit Check
When you apply for credit, a credit card issuer typically conducts a credit check as part of the application review process. The company can obtain a credit report, discussed in Chapter 7, which indicates your creditworthiness based on information such as whether you have made late payments or have any current unpaid bills. A credit report summarizes your history of repaying credit with banks, retailers, credit card issuers, and other lenders. Recall that credit problems remain on a credit bureau’s report for seven years. If you claim bankruptcy, this information normally remains on a credit bureau’s report for up to 10 years.

Other Information That Creditors Evaluate
Creditors also often ask an applicant to disclose income and any existing debt so that they can assess the existing debt level as a percentage of income. When the debt level is only a small fraction of the applicant’s income, creditors are more willing to provide credit.

In addition to information about the applicant, creditors also consider existing economic conditions when they evaluate credit applications. Creditors are less willing to extend credit when the economy is weak.

Types of Credit Cards
The major issuers of credit cards include MasterCard, Visa, American Express, and Discover. These cards are especially convenient because they are accepted by most merchants. Merchants honor credit cards because they recognize that many consumers will make purchases only if they can use their credit cards. A credit card company receives a percentage (commonly between 2% and 4%) of the payments made to merchants with its credit card. For example, when you use your MasterCard to pay for a $100 car repair at a gas station, the gas station receives a payment from MasterCard that reflects a small discount, such as 3%, or $97. Mastercard charges you $100 for this transaction.

Many financial institutions also issue MasterCard and Visa credit cards. Each financial institution makes its own arrangements with the credit card company to do the billing and financing when necessary. The institution provides financing for cardholders who do not pay their balance in full when they receive a billing statement. The financial institutions benefit by providing financing because they typically earn a high rate of interest on the credit extended. Some universities and charitable organizations also issue MasterCard and Visa credit cards and provide financing if needed.

Another type of card, known as a charge card, does not extend credit and requires that the balance be paid in full each month. These cards are commonly used by businesses and some individuals who desire an easy way to track travel and other expenses but do not need access to credit. American Express, Diner’s Club, and some financial institutions issue charge cards.

Credit cards are either unsecured cards, which do not require you to deposit cash as collateral before obtaining the card, or secured cards, which do require a security deposit. The more popular types of unsecured cards include retail credit cards, rewards credit cards, balance transfer credit cards, and medical credit cards.

Retail Credit Cards
Retail (or proprietary) credit cards are issued under the name of a specific retail establishment. For example, many retail stores (such as Target and Macy’s) and gas stations (such as Shell Oil and ExxonMobil) issue their own credit cards. You can usually obtain an application for a proprietary card while paying for products or services. You may be given instant credit when you complete the application and may receive a discount on your first purchase. With most retail credit cards, you can pay a small portion of the balance owed each month, which means that the merchant finances your purchase. The interest rate you are charged when financing with retail credit cards is usually 18% or higher. Originally, retail stores issued closed loop cards, which could be used only at outlets of the retail establishment that issued them. However, some retail stores now establish partnerships with credit card companies to issue cobranded or affinity cards (called open loop cards) that carry the store’s name but can be used at other merchants like standard credit cards. retail (or proprietary) credit card
A credit card that is issued under the name of a specific retail establishment. A closed loop card will be honored only at outlets of that establishment; an open loop card can be used at other merchants.

You might need several different proprietary credit cards to cover all the retail stores where you shop, and you will have to pay a separate bill for each proprietary card that you used in that month. Conversely, if you could use one credit card for all purchases, you could make only one online payment from your checking account. In addition, keeping track of your spending is easier if you use only one card.

Rewards Cards
Some credit cards offer rewards to cardholders who frequently use that credit card. Several different types of rewards are available. People who drive a long distance to work every day or who work as contract drivers for services such as Uber or Lyft may benefit from a gas rewards card, which gives cash back after you spend a certain amount on gasoline each month. Other cards offer a percentage of cash back on eligible purchases after you reach a specific spending limit each month. Travel rewards cards offer points that can be redeemed for travel-related purchases such as airfare or hotels. If you spend $20,000 over the year on travel-related purchases and use a travel rewards credit for all of them, you may accumulate enough points by the end of the year to earn a free round-trip flight on a designated airline to any destination in the United States. Some airlines issue their own credit cards, which provide similar benefits. Some rewards cards may require a certain amount of spending during a given period.

Prestige cards, which offer even more benefits, are available for individuals with high incomes and exceptional credit histories. These cards, which may carry annual fees of several hundred dollars, may offer rewards such as priority access to private jet programs and concierge service at luxury hotels.

prestige cards
Credit cards issued by a financial institution to individuals who have an exceptional credit standing.

Balance Transfer Cards
Balance transfer cards are related to rewards cards in that they can help you save money. A balance transfer card allows a consumer to transfer the balance owed on an existing credit card to a new card to save money on interest. Some cards allow you to transfer other debt as well such as installment debt and even auto loans. Typically, a balance transfer card has a 0% introductory interest rate or a very low rate on transfers for a specific period such as six months or a year. Sometimes the card offers a 0% interest rate on purchases as well. If used very carefully, balance transfer cards can help you save money. But you must be sure to pay off the balance in full during the introductory 0% interest rate period, because the interest rate will rise to a high level as soon as the period ends. In addition, if the card offers a 0% or low rate on both balance transfers and new purchases, the introductory period may be shorter for the purchases.

Unfortunately, you can’t avoid paying interest on a credit card balance forever by continually transferring your balance from card to card to take advantage of the introductory period. Whenever you obtain a new card and transfer your balance, you are obtaining new credit and that will negatively affect your credit score. Doing one balance transfer will lower your score only slightly, but doing several transfers could have a substantial effect on your score. In addition, the credit card companies will stop allowing you to do balance transfers because these cards are typically available only to consumers with good credit scores. Finally, balance transfers generally are not free. Often the credit card company will charge a fee of 3% to 5% of the balance.

Medical Credit Cards
Many health care professionals such as doctors, dentists, and veterinarians have started offering medical credit cards to persons using their services. Applications for the cards are typically available in the medical office. The cards are issued by the major credit card companies, which pay the patient’s medical bill and then collect the monthly credit card payments from the patient. The medical office benefits by being paid immediately and by not having to worry about collecting the debt if the patient fails to pay. The card can be used for all services provided by that office.

Medical credit cards can be useful because they enable consumers to pay off a large medical bill over several months without paying interest. Typically, the consumer does not have to pay interest if the bill is paid in full within a certain period, such as 6, 12, or 18 months. But if the bill is not paid in full during that time, all the deferred interest will be added to the amount due.

Secured and Prepaid Cards
If you have a poor credit history and have difficulty obtaining a standard unsecured credit card, you may be able to improve your credit record by obtaining a secured credit card, which is “secured” or backed by funds that you deposit. You can apply for a secured credit card at your financial institution, which will require you to make a deposit to a special account. The amount of funds that you deposit will be your credit limit, so if you deposit $500, you will have a limit of $500. You will receive a statement of your charges each month and be required to make a minimum payment. By making your payments on time and demonstrating that you can use credit wisely, you can repair your damaged credit history and may eventually qualify for a standard credit card.

An alternative to the secured credit card is a prepaid card, which can be purchased at many retail stores and even gas stations. There is no application process; you simply pay the cashier and the funds are loaded into the card’s account. Once you have spent all the funds, the card can be reloaded. Although you should keep track of your purchases as you use the funds, there also is usually a website where you can check your balance online. Some cards allow you to have a personal identification number (PIN), which will enable you to use the card to withdraw cash from automated teller machines (ATMs).
The advantage of prepaid cards is that they are convenient for people who do not have bank accounts. However, a major disadvantage of prepaid cards is the fees. You may have to pay an activation fee, a fee for reloading, a fee for withdrawing cash from an ATM, an inactivity fee if you don’t use the card regularly, and even a fee for checking your balance online. Another disadvantage is that if your card is lost or stolen, you generally have less protection than with a standard credit card. Fees and theft protection vary substantially among card issuers, so always read the contract that comes with the card very carefully.

In recent years, some employers have begun paying their employees’ wages with prepaid cards because issuing cards is considerably cheaper than issuing payroll checks. Although this practice can be convenient for employees without bank accounts, it has become controversial because of the fees associated with the cards. After receiving many complaints about prepaid payroll cards, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau sent a notice to employers across the country reminding them that employees cannot be required to accept prepaid cards. They must be given at least one other option for receiving their wages, such as a check or direct deposit to a bank account. Employees are also entitled to receive a written explanation of all fees associated with the other cards and other protections.

Credit Limit
Credit card companies set a credit limit, which specifies the maximum amount of credit allowed. The credit limit varies among individuals. It may be a relatively small amount (such as $300) for individuals who have a low income. The credit limit can usually be increased for individuals who prove that they are creditworthy by paying their credit card bills on time. Some credit card companies may allow a large limit (such as $10,000 or more) to households that have made their credit payments consistently and have higher incomes.

A very high maximum credit limit may tempt you to overspend. Make sure that your maximum limit is high enough to cover any necessary monthly purchases but not so high that it encourages you to spend beyond what you can afford.

Overlimit Protection
A few credit cards provide overlimit protection, which allows you to make purchases beyond your stated credit limit. This is similar to the overdraft protection that is provided on some checking accounts at financial institutions, in which checks can be written and will clear even if there are not enough funds in the checking account. The overlimit protection on credit cards prevents a situation in which you try to use your credit card, but it is rejected because you are over your credit limit.

Fees are charged, however, when overlimit protection is provided. The fees vary among credit card issuers but can be as high as $39 or more each time the protection is used. Card issuers are prohibited from charging an overlimit fee unless the cardholder specifically requests overlimit protection.

Annual Fee
Many credit cards charge an annual fee for the privilege of using the card. Annual fees range from $40 to $500 for cards with extensive rewards programs. The fee is sometimes waived for individuals who use their credit cards frequently and pay their credit card bills promptly. You can find detailed information about credit cards on several websites. By reviewing the lists of available cards, you can probably find cards that do not charge fees that may be suitable for you. Some credit card issuers adjust the annual fee to your level of spending. If you spend less, you pay a higher annual fee.

Grace Period
Credit cards typically allow a grace period in which you are not charged any interest on your purchases. If a grace period is allowed, the card issuer must ensure that the bill is mailed or delivered at least 21 days before payment is due. Thus, the credit card issuer essentially provides you with free credit from the time you made the purchase until the bill is due.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

On June 1, Stephanie Spratt pays a car repair bill of $200 with her credit card. The closing date for that month’s billing statement is June 20. The card issuer mails the billing statement so that Stephanie receives it on June 30, and her payment is due on July 21. In this case, Stephanie receives about 51 days of free credit. On June 19, she purchased some clothing with her credit card. For that purchase, which is included on the billing statement, she receives about 40 days of free credit. On July 10, she purchased concert tickets with her credit card. This purchase occurs after the closing
date of the billing statement and therefore will be listed on the next billing statement, which is due on August 21. For this purchase, credit is extended for about 41 days.

Late Fees
Credit card bills must be due on the same date each month, and payments received by 5:00 p.m. on the due date must be considered timely. Late fees must be “reasonable,” which in practice means no more than $25 for a first violation and $35 for a second violation within the next six months. A late fee may not be more than the minimum payment due.

Interest Rate on Credit Cards
When you are granted credit and do not pay it off before the stated deadline, you will have to pay interest on that credit based on the interest rate imposed by the credit card company. About 38% of American consumers carry a balance on their credit cards, meaning that they do not immediately pay off the full amount of credit they are granted for their purchases each month. The interest rate charged on credit is commonly between 15% and 20% on an annualized basis and does not vary much over time. Although financing is convenient for individuals who are short on funds, it is expensive and should be avoided if possible.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.bankrate.com/calculators.aspx

To get
Access to debt management calculators in order to estimate your future credit card payments or estimate the time that you will need to pay off your credit card debt.

Types of Interest Rates Charged on Credit Cards
Credit cards can offer a fixed rate, a variable rate, or a tiered rate. A fixed rate does not change even if market interest rates are changing. The financial institution that provides financing on a credit card can change the fixed interest rate that it charges, but it must notify you if it does so.

A variable rate adjusts in response to a specified market interest rate, such as a one-year Treasury bill rate. For example, the credit card interest rate could be set equal to the one-year Treasury bill rate 
+
6
%
.
 The financial institution is required to disclose how that variable rate is determined.

Financial institutions may offer a tiered rate, such as a relatively low rate for balances below a specified balance and a higher rate above that balance. They can also increase the interest rate as a penalty for making late payments.

Regulations on Credit Card Interest Rates
Credit card companies are not allowed to increase the interest rate on one credit card if you miss a payment on another credit card. In addition, credit card companies must give 45 days of advance notice if they raise the interest rate on your credit card. Also, the rate on an existing credit balance cannot be increased unless the individual is at least 60 days late on payments.

Cash Advances
Many credit cards allow cash advances at ATMs. Because a cash advance represents credit extended by the sponsoring financial institution, interest is charged on this transaction. A transaction fee of 1% or 2% of the advance may also be charged. Credit card companies also sometimes provide “convenience checks” that you can use to make purchases that cannot be made by credit card. The interest rate applied to cash advances and convenience checks is generally higher than the interest rate charged on credit extended for specific credit card purchases. The interest rate is applied at the time of the cash advance; the grace period that applies to purchases with a credit card does not apply to cash advances and convenience checks. So, although cash advances and checks are convenient, they can also be extremely costly.
College Student Use of Credit Cards
About two-thirds of all college students today have a credit card in their own name. There are some major benefits for you as a college student to have a credit card. They offer convenience so that you do not need to carry much cash and can serve as a backup in case you need access to cash to deal with an emergency. While the credit may be limited for your first card, that also imposes a credit limit that could help you to control your spending.

You may want to establish a history of using credit cards to gain the trust of companies that issue credit cards. You should also consider using credit cards for shopping instead of debit cards because these transactions can build your history of using credit. Conversely, your debit card transactions are not reported to the credit bureaus, because the debit cards use the money in your checking account.

Assuming that you establish a good history, try to ensure that your credit card issuer reports the results to all three credit bureaus. As your perceived creditworthiness is proven over time, the credit score that you are assigned by credit bureaus can increase. This will allow you to gain more privileges from credit card issuers, such as no annual fee for use of the card. Alternatively, you might be able to negotiate for lower interest rates if you do not pay the balance off. In addition, a high credit score will allow you to more easily obtain loans to finance other purchases such as a vehicle or a home in the future. High credit scores also can allow you to obtain better auto insurance rates and to get an apartment.

A potential disadvantage of having a credit card during college is that if you struggle to make timely payments, you will start off with a low credit score that could be difficult to overcome. Late payments or a lack of payments can linger on your credit report for several years. Therefore, college students who do not believe they can make payments in a timely manner may be better off without a credit card during their college years.

One compromise for students who want the benefits of a credit card but worry about their potential to miss payments would be a secured credit card. With this type of card, you provide a deposit to be used by the credit card issuer if you were unable to make payments on the credit. You can still build a solid credit history with a secured credit card.

A survey by U.S. News in 2022 found that about 46 percent of undergraduate college students with a credit card have credit card debt. That is, those students are paying only a portion of their balances. This may not only affect their credit score but also subject them to a high interest rate on the debt that they have not repaid. If the debt level was low, this result would not be so concerning. However, more than one-fourth of all the college students in the survey stated that their debt level was above $2,000. About 50 percent of all college students did not know that their credit score could be damaged if they waited to pay their credit card bill.

Warren Buffett, a successful billionaire investor, has offered the following financial advice to college students: You cannot make financial progress if you borrow money at 18% (a typical interest rate on credit cards). Even if obtaining credit at a high interest rate does not cause personal bankruptcy, it limits your potential increase in personal wealth.
Repaying Credit
The finance charge is the interest that you must pay as a result of using credit. Purchases after the statement closing date are not normally considered when determining the finance charge because of the grace period, as they will appear on your next monthly statement. The finance charge applies only to balances that were not paid in full before their due date in the current billing period.

finance charge
The interest that you must pay as a result of using credit.

Average Daily Balance Method
The most frequently used method to calculate finance charges is the average daily balance method. For each day in the billing period, the credit card company takes your beginning balance at the start of the day and then subtracts any payments made by you on that day to determine the balance at the end of the day. Then, it determines the average daily balance at the end of the day for every day in the billing period. This method takes into account the time that you pay off any part of the outstanding balance.

There are also variations of this method. The method may be adjusted to exclude any new purchases or to compute the average over two billing periods instead of one period.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
The web site www.consumerfinance.gov

To get
Advice and guidance on obtaining a credit card.

Example
Assume that as of June 10, you have an outstanding credit card balance of $700 from purchases made over the last month. The new billing period begins on June 11. Assume that your outstanding balance for the first 15 days of this new billing period (from June 11 to June 25) is $700. Then, on June 25, the financial institution receives a payment of $200 from you, reducing the balance to $500. This is the balance for the remaining 15 days of the billing period.

Under this method, the monthly interest rate is applied to the average daily balance. Because your daily balance was $700 over the first 15 days and $500 over the last 15 days, your average daily balance was $600 over the 30-day billing period. Using a monthly interest rate of 1.5%, your finance charge is

$
600
×
.015
=
$
9.00
Estimating Credit Repayment
The percentage of the credit that you must pay as interest on your credit card on an annual basis is based on a simple interest rate.

simple interest rate
The percentage of credit that must be paid as interest on an annual basis.

Example
If you borrow $10,000 and are charged a simple interest rate of 12%, the amount of interest you pay each year is

Amount of Interest
=
Amount Borrowed
×
Simple Interest Rate
=
$
10,000
×
.12
=
$
1,200
The annual percentage rate (APR) on credit is the simple interest rate after including any fees (such as an application processing fee) imposed by the creditor. The APR is useful because it allows you to easily compare financing costs among various possible creditors.

annual percentage rate (APR)
The simple interest rate including any fees charged by the creditor.
Impact of Interest Rate on the Amount You Owe
The interest rate can have a major impact on the amount that you owe when using credit cards. A card with a higher interest rate can result in substantially higher interest expenses.

Example
You plan to apply for credit card X because it has no annual fee, whereas credit card Y has an annual fee of $30. You typically have an outstanding credit balance of $3,000 each month. Credit card X charges an annual interest rate of 18% on balances carried forward, and credit card Y charges an interest rate of 12% on balances carried forward. The difference in the expenses associated with each credit card is shown here:

 	Credit Card X	Credit Card Y
Average monthly balance	$3,000	$3,000
Annual interest rate	18%	12%
Annual interest expenses	
18
%
×
$
3,000
=
$
540
12
%
×
$
3,000
=
$
360
Annual fee	$0	$30
Total annual expenses	$540	$390
The annual interest expenses can be determined by knowing the average monthly balance over the year. The higher the average monthly balance, the higher your interest expenses because you will have to pay interest on the balance.

Notice that credit card X results in $540 in annual interest expenses, which is $180 more than the annual interest expenses from credit card Y. Thus, although credit card X does not charge an annual fee, your interest expenses from using credit card X could be very high. The high interest expenses more than offset the advantage of no annual fee.

If you always paid off your balance in the month that it occurred, you would not have any interest expenses. In this case, the interest rate on the credit card would not be important, and you may prefer credit card X because it does not have an annual fee. That is, you would benefit from no annual fee and would not be adversely affected by the high interest rate.

Exhibit 8.2 shows the amount of interest you would pay per year on a $10,000 loan at various simple interest rates, as well as the total amount of interest that would be paid over a four-year period. Notice how much larger the interest payments are when you pay a higher interest rate. When obtaining credit, make sure you seek out the lowest interest rate possible.

Exhibit 8.2 How Interest Payments Are Influenced by Interest Rates (for a Loan of $10,000)
Figure 8.2 Full Alternative Text
Impact of Financing Period on Credit Payments
The total amount of interest paid on a credit card balance depends on the length of the financing period. Assume that you borrowed $10,000, and you only pay interest on the loan until you pay back the entire loan amount. In Exhibit 8.2, compare the amount of interest you would have to pay on a loan that lasts one year versus one that lasts four years for any particular interest rate shown. If you can pay off the loan at the end of one year, you would pay annual interest only one time, so your total interest paid is shown in the second column of Exhibit 8.2. However, if it takes you four years to pay off the loan, you have to pay the annual interest four times. Your total interest paid is shown in the third column; notice how much more interest you would have to pay if the loan lasted for four years.

Your Repayment Details
Your billing statement is required to show how many months (or years) it will take to pay off your balance if you make only the minimum payment each month. The statement will also tell you the total amount, including principal and interest, that you will pay if you pay only the minimum each month. In addition, the statement must show how much you would need to pay each month to pay off the balance in three years, the total cost of doing so, and the amount saved compared to making only the minimum payment. If you want to know more about paying off your balance, you can go to various websites, such as www.creditcards.com, which has calculators that estimate how much you will have to pay per month to pay off your balance over a specified number of months. These calculators are very useful because they can help you achieve your goal of paying off your credit card balance within a particular period.

Impact of COVID-19 on Credit Repayment
During the COVID-19 pandemic, slightly more than half of all cardholders who were surveyed said they relied more heavily than usual on their credit cards. Various credit card issuers gave cardholders whose financial condition worsened during COVID-19 some form of relief, such as waiver of late fees or suspension of minimum payments for a few months.
Reviewing Your Credit Card Statement
Individuals typically receive a credit card bill at the end of their billing cycle. This bill lists all the purchases that were made with that credit card during that period, as well as any balance carried over from the previous statement.

A credit card statement includes the following information:

PREVIOUS BALANCE. The amount carried over from the previous credit card statement

PURCHASES. The amount of credit used this month to make purchases

CASH ADVANCES. The amount of credit used this month by writing checks against the credit card account or making ATM withdrawals

PAYMENTS. The payments that you made to the sponsoring financial institution this billing cycle

FINANCE CHARGE. The finance charge that is applied to any credit that exceeds the grace period or to any cash advances

NEW BALANCE. The amount that you currently owe the financial institution

MINIMUM PAYMENT. The minimum amount that you must pay

PAYING OFF THE BALANCE. The amount of time it will take to pay off the balance if only the minimum payment is made, and the monthly payment required to pay off the balance in three years

INTEREST AND FEES. The total amount of interest charged so far this year and the total amount of fees assessed

The credit card statement details why your new balance differs from the balance shown on your statement in the previous month. The difference between the previous balance and the new balance results from any new purchases, cash advances, or finance charges, which increase your balance, as well as any payments or refund credits, which reduce your balance. The statement also shows the method of calculating finance charges.

When you receive your account statement, you should always scrutinize it for errors. There could be a math error, a double charge for a purchase, inappropriate charges due to someone else using your credit card, or an incorrect amount on a purchase. Under consumer protection laws, you have the right to dispute possible errors.

You can call the card issuer, but to protect your rights, you must also send a written notice within 60 calendar days after the charge appears on your monthly statement. Send your letter by certified mail to the address designated for billing inquiries on your statement. Do not send the letter to the address where payments are sent. Explain the problem and include copies of receipts if they are relevant. The card issuer must acknowledge receiving your letter within 30 days. The issuer then has 90 days to investigate the problem. You do not have to pay the disputed charges during this period, but you still must pay any undisputed charges on your bill. If the card issuer finds that there was an error, the charge will be removed from your bill. If the investigation indicates that the bill is correct, the issuer must send you a written explanation.
Regulation of Credit Cards
In the past, some credit card companies charged excessive fees or did not fully disclose the conditions under which fees would be assessed. Regulations have been implemented to ensure better treatment of consumers and to make sure that requirements in credit card agreements are transparent.

Credit CARD Act
The U.S. Congress passed the Credit Card Accountability, Responsibility, and Disclosure Act (also called the Credit CARD Act) of 2009 to ensure that consumers who use credit card services are treated fairly and have access to complete information about the fees and other provisions of the credit agreement. This act contained numerous provisions that provide you with more protection. Some of the more important provisions are described here.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.consumerfinance.gov and search for “equal credit opportunity.”

To get
Information about laws that protect your rights when using credit.

Conditions for Fees
Credit card companies must clearly disclose the conditions under which fees will be charged to prospective cardholders. If a card issuer changes its fee structure, it must disclose this information at least 45 days in advance. Fees cannot exceed more than 25% of the initial credit limit. Fees charged for inactivity on credit cards were eliminated.

Advance Notice to Change Interest Rate
Credit card companies may not increase the interest rate charged on credit that was provided for purchases made in the past. For example, if you made many purchases last year on a credit card and still owe much of the balance today, the credit card company cannot increase the interest rate applied to what you owe. If the credit card company decides to increase the interest rate, it must first notify you 45 days in advance, and then the higher interest rate only applies to credit provided for new purchases and does not apply to credit provided in the past.

Promotional Interest Rate Guidelines
Promotional interest rates advertised to entice new cardholders must clearly disclose the details of the deal. In addition, the promotional rate must be offered for at least six months.

Payment Period
Cardholders must be given at least 21 days from the day on which the bill is mailed to make payment.

Credit Limit
Cardholders may not be charged an overlimit fee for exceeding their credit limit unless they have specifically requested the card issuer’s overlimit protection program. This provision prevents situations in which cardholders are charged fees for going beyond their credit limit without realizing that they have exceeded it.

Disclosure about Paying Balance Due
Credit card statements must state how long it would take for a cardholder to pay off the existing balance due if only the minimum payment is made each month.

Restrictions for Cardholders Younger than Age 21
Cardholders younger than the age of 21 must show proof of their income or have an adult cosigner to justify approval of credit. This is intended to ensure that young consumers are given a limited amount of credit that is in line with what they can afford. Gifts from credit card companies to college students who apply for credit cards are restricted.

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
During the 2008–2009 financial crisis, some consumers who borrowed money (in the form of mortgages, credit card debt, and other forms of credit) were misled by financial institutions about the terms of the financing arrangement. The Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (sometimes referred to as the Financial Reform Act) was passed in 2010 to prevent deceptive practices in the credit granting process. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) was created in 2010 as part of the act. Its primary goal is to enforce consumer finance laws (such as those imposed by the Credit CARD Act) to ensure that consumers who need financial services are treated fairly.

The CFPB also attempts to make sure that consumers receive full disclosure of information they need to make financial decisions. It has the authority to establish regulations that ensure consumers are treated properly and to prevent deceptive practices by financial institutions.
Tips on Using Credit Cards
Because you are likely to have one or more credit cards, consider the following tips to enjoy their use without incurring excessive costs.

Use a Credit Card Only if You Can Cover the Bill
Treat a credit card as a means of convenience, not a source of funds. Use a credit card only if you will have the cash to cover the payment when you receive your credit card statement. The use of this self-imposed credit limit is illustrated in Exhibit 8.3. The difference between your expected cash inflows and your expenses paid by online payment or check (such as rent) or by cash is the maximum amount of credit that you can use and still ensure full payment of the credit card balance.

Exhibit 8.3 Self-Imposed Credit Limit Based on Monthly Cash Inflows

Figure 8.3 Full Alternative Text
Impose a Tight Credit Limit
You may consider imposing a tighter credit limit as part of your budgeting process so that you can save or invest a specific amount every month. This limit is illustrated in Exhibit 8.4. You determine the maximum amount of credit you will use each month only after accounting for all spending to be paid by online payment, check, or cash, as well as a specified amount of savings.

Exhibit 8.4 Self-Imposed Credit Limit Based on Monthly Cash Inflows and a Monthly Savings Goal

Figure 8.4 Full Alternative Text
You can also ask your credit card company to lower your credit limit to encourage you to restrict your spending. You might even consider using only credit cards sponsored by companies that sell necessities, such as a gas station or home repair store. You can cancel credit cards that could be used for discretionary spending. Remember, though, that reducing the amount of credit that you have available can lower your credit score if you have any debt because your debt-to-credit ratio will increase. Cutting up your cards so that you can’t use them is preferable to canceling them as long as you don’t order replacements.
FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Managing Your Credit
Application
The Intuit Mint app helps you manage your credit and your budget.

To Find It
Search for the Intuit Mint app on your mobile device.

Reduce Your Credit Limit When the Economy Weakens
When the economy weakens, your cash inflows could be reduced. Your employer might cut your work hours, which would reduce your income. During the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, many people lost their jobs. As a result, they not only needed to rely more on credit cards, but also were not earning the income necessary to pay off the credit cards. In addition, their investments (if they had any) were losing value in the first few months of the pandemic.

ECONOMIC IMPACT

The obvious lesson is to reduce your reliance on credit so that you are not subjected to increased financial problems if economic conditions deteriorate. You can prepare for the possible reduction in your income by reducing your credit limit. That way, even if your income is reduced, you may still be able to pay off your credit promptly.

An extreme strategy would be to cancel all credit cards and pay for all expenses with cash, online payments, or checks. Some people are more disciplined with their spending when they use cash to make payments because they recognize that they are giving up money to make purchases. When they use credit cards, they do not feel the pain of spending their money because they did not need cash or to make a payment from their checking account. Again, consider just cutting up your cards rather than canceling them so that your credit score will not be negatively affected.

Pay Credit Card Bills Before Investing Money
When you finance credit card balances, your cost of financing will normally be much higher than the return you are receiving on any money market investments that you hold. Therefore, you should always pay off any balance on credit cards before you invest funds anywhere else.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
The web site www.ftc.gov

To get
Advice and guidance about establishing, using, and protecting your credit.

In general, avoid carrying a balance on your credit cards when you have the money to pay the balance. Debit cards are a good alternative to credit cards because they offer the same convenience of not carrying cash.

Some individuals use their money to invest in risky investments (such as stocks) rather than paying off their credit card bills. They apparently believe that their return on the investments will be high, but perhaps do not realize that they may be paying an interest rate of 20 percent or more on that money. When delaying your credit card payment, consider the following logic. When you use money to pay your credit card bill immediately, you are preventing a charge of about 20% interest. Therefore, you have effectively increased your savings by 20% by using these funds to pay off the credit card debt.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance
Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt just received a credit card bill for $700. The sponsoring financial institution charges a 20% annual interest rate on the outstanding balance. Stephanie has sufficient funds in her checking account to pay the credit card bill, but she is considering financing her payment. If she pays $100 toward the credit card bill and finances the remaining $600 for one year, she will incur interest expenses of:

Interest
=
Loan Amount
×
Interest Rate
=
$
600
×
.20
=
$
120
She could use the $600 to invest in savings rather than pay off her credit card bill. After one year, the $600 in a savings account will accumulate to $618 based on a 3% annual interest rate, as shown here:

Interest Earned on Deposit
=
Initial Deposit
×
Interest Rate
=
$
600
×
.03
=
$
18
Her interest owed on the credit card loan ($120) exceeds the interest earned on the deposit ($18) in one year by $102. Stephanie decides that she would be better off using her cash to pay off the credit card bill immediately. By using her money to cover the credit card bill, she gives up the opportunity to earn 3% on that money, but she also avoids the 20% rate charged on the credit card loan. Thus, her wealth will be $102 higher as a result of using funds to pay off the credit card bill rather than investing in a bank deposit. Although she could have used the funds to invest in a high-risk investment that might achieve a greater return, paying off the credit card avoids a 20% financing rate.

If your cash inflows are not sufficient to cover your credit card bill, you should pull funds from savings (if there is no penalty for withdrawal) to cover the payment.

Pay Off Credit Card Debt Before Other Debt
If you cannot pay off your credit card balance in full each month with income or with savings, at least pay off this balance as soon as possible and cut back your discretionary spending. If you have other debt outstanding, you should pay off credit card debt first (assuming that the credit card debt has a higher interest rate). Even if you cannot pay your bill in full, you should still attempt to pay as much as possible so that you can minimize finance charges.

If possible, you may even consider taking out a home equity loan (discussed in Chapter 9) to pay any credit card bills so that you can avoid the high interest expenses. This strategy makes sense only if your credit card debt is substantial (such as several thousand dollars), and the interest rate on the home equity loan is less than that on your credit card.

Avoid Credit Repair Services
Companies that offer credit repair services claim to be able to solve your credit problems. For example, they may help you fix a mistake on your credit report. However, you could have done this yourself, without paying for the service. If you have made late credit payments or have defaulted on a loan, a credit repair service does not have the power to remove such credit information from your report.

Resolving an Excessive Credit Balance
If you find yourself with an excessive credit balance, there are several steps you can take. First, spend as little as possible. Then consider how you can obtain funds to meet your monthly payment or to pay off your balance. Look for a job if you don’t have one, or try to work more hours at your current job. However, for students, consider how additional work could affect your school schedule.

An alternative solution is to borrow funds from a family member. You will now have a monthly loan payment to a family member rather than credit card balances, but the payments may be lower. Another possibility is a debt consolidation loan from a financial institution. The structured schedule for paying off the loan in a set time period will instill more discipline in you than meeting a low minimum monthly payment on a credit card. If you do not choose to or cannot get a loan, you can still discipline yourself to make more than the minimum payment on your credit card.

You might even consider selling some assets to obtain cash, such as trading in a relatively new car for an older car. Also, consider ways of reducing your everyday expenses. For example, if you have large monthly payments due to your smartphone, you could for a less expensive contract. If you have your own apartment, you may consider getting a roommate.

Another alternative is to call the credit card company and explain your situation. Credit card companies rarely forgive debt entirely, but when the problem is due to something beyond the cardholder’s control such as a serious illness or loss of a job, the company may allow you to make smaller minimum payments for a certain period or may even forgive a small amount of the debt. If your excessive balance is simply due to your overspending, however, the company will expect to be paid in full.

Working with a Collection Agency
If you are unable to make any payments on your credit balance and cannot reach some arrangement with the credit card company, the company may turn your debt over to a debt collection agency. If you are contacted by a collection agency, by law you have certain rights. Any debt collector who contacts you about a debt must give you certain information either during the first contact or within five days. You must be informed of the creditor’s name, the amount of the debt, and that you have a right to dispute the debt. If you are unsure if you owe a particular debt or think the amount is incorrect, you have a right to ask for written verification. Be sure to determine how old the debt is. If it is several years old, you might want to check online about the statute of limitations on that type of debt in your state. A statute of limitations establishes the period in which you can be sued for the debt. For example, if the statute of limitations on credit card debt is five years, the company cannot sue you to collect the debt if it is older than five years. However, statutes of limitations can sometime be extended for various reasons.

Once you have determined that you owe the debt and that the statute of limitations does not apply, you may try to negotiate with the collection agency to settle for a smaller amount or to make extended payments on the debt. A credit counselor from a nonprofit counseling agency may be able to help you negotiate, but check with your state attorney general’s office on the counseling agency’s reputation before you select a counselor. If you reach an agreement with the collection agency, be sure to put the entire agreement in writing so that you will have a record of exactly what you promised to do. Reaching an agreement with a collection agency will not remove the bad debt from your credit report, however; it will remain on your report for seven years. In addition, the negative effect on your FICO score will be the same whether the debt is large or small.

Filing for Bankruptcy
If all else fails, you may need to file for personal bankruptcy. The bankruptcy rules are designed not only to discharge your debt but also to help you avoid running up excessive debt in the future. For this reason, the law requires you to receive credit counseling from a government-approved organization within 180 days before filing for bankruptcy. The counseling session can take place in person, on the phone, or online. There is a fee of about $50, but it is waived for anyone who can’t afford to pay. During the session, the counselor will evaluate your situation and discuss various alternatives. In addition, after you have filed for bankruptcy, you are required to complete a debtor education course before your debts will be discharged. The course will provide information on budgeting, managing money, and using credit wisely. The course costs $50 to $100, but the fee can be waived if you can’t afford to pay.

personal bankruptcy
A plan proposed to the court in which you repay at least a portion of your debt and pay attorney and filing fees.

There are two types of personal bankruptcy: Chapter 7 and Chapter 13. Chapter 7 (also known as straight bankruptcy) allows the discharge of almost all debts, but you will have to surrender most of your assets to help satisfy the debt. Some assets such as work-related tools are exempt and will not have to be surrendered. If your current income is above a certain level, which varies by state, you will not be eligible for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and will have to file for Chapter 13. Under Chapter 13, you may keep property that would have to be surrendered under Chapter 7, but you will have to work with the court to create a repayment plan under which you will repay as much of your debt as possible over a three- to five-year period. Once the repayment period ends, any remaining debts are discharged. You incur no interest charges on the indebtedness during the repayment period. A Chapter 13 bankruptcy remains on your credit report for 7 years after the case is filed, whereas a Chapter 7 bankruptcy remains for 10 years. Bankruptcy should be considered only if there is no other option.
How Credit Management Fits within Your Financial Plan
Exhibit 8.5 identifies the key credit management decisions that should be included within a financial plan, using Stephanie Spratt’s plan as an example.

Exhibit 8.5 How Credit Management Fits Within Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Plan

Figure 8.5 Full Alternative Text
Plan For Managing Credit
Stephanie will assess her options for paying off her existing student loan with other credit.

Analysis
Stephanie’s analysis of her credit plan is as follows.

My paychecks are direct deposited into my checking account. I always use this account to pay off all expenses.

I periodically use my credit cards for convenience but always pay off the balance each month, so I have no credit card debt.

I still owe most of the balance ($10,000) on my existing student loan that charges me an interest rate of 6% (loan maturity is 11 years).

I have several offers from credit card companies to give me credit cards with 0% financing over the first six months.

I wish I could pay off my student loan quickly. However, the use of credit cards to pay off the student loan is not feasible, because after six months, I would incur very high financing charges (such as 20%) from the credit card companies. I would essentially be replacing my student loan debt at 6% interest with credit card debt at about 20% interest.

Decision
Stephanie makes the following decisions.

My savings are growing over time. However, I cannot consider paying off even a portion of the student loan early because I need a down payment on a new car soon. I also want to start saving for a down payment for a small home in the near future. The interest rate on my student loan is 6%, which is reasonable. I can afford the small monthly loan payment of $100. Yet if I can accumulate enough savings after buying a new car and a small home, I will likely attempt to pay off the student loan early. The rate of return on my savings will probably be lower than the rate I am being charged on the student loan, so I will pay off the student loan once I have savings that are not needed for some other future purpose.

Discussion Questions
How would Stephanie’s credit management decisions be different if she were a single mother of two children?

How would Stephanie’s credit management decisions be affected if she were 35 years old? If she were 50 years old?
Summary
BACKGROUND ON CREDIT CARDS. An advantage of using credit is that it enables you to obtain products and services that you cannot afford otherwise. A disadvantage of credit is that it is easier to obtain it than to pay it back. Some individuals use too much credit and are unable to make their credit payments, which may prevent them from obtaining credit in the future.

When individuals apply for credit, they provide information about their cash inflows (income), cash outflows (spending habits), and collateral. Creditors also evaluate their credit report, which contains information on their credit history collected by a credit bureau.

Credit cards are issued by major credit card companies (such as Visa, MasterCard, and American Express), proprietary merchants (such as Macy’s), and some other sponsors. There are several different types of cards including rewards cards, balance transfer cards, and secured cards. Credit cards are also distinguished by the credit limit, the annual fee, the interest rate charged on credit not paid by the due date, and whether they allow cash advances.

COLLEGE STUDENT USE OF CREDIT CARDS. About two-thirds of college students have a credit card. It allows convenience and an emergency use of funds. Its use also establishes a credit history that could allow students access to other types of loans, such as car loans or mortgage loans. However, the use of credit cards can also backfire for college students who overspend or struggle to repay the credit. Their credit history could be damaged for several years, and it may be difficult to recover from that.

CREDIT REPAYMENT. By estimating credit repayment, you will notice the impact that a high interest rate has on the amount that you owe. In addition, delaying repayment for a longer period can substantially increase the total cost of credit.

CREDIT CARD STATEMENT. The credit card statement discloses your previous balance, a summary of your purchases and cash advances, recent payments that you made, finance charges (if any), the new balance, the minimum payment required, the time required to pay off the balance if you make only the minimum payment each month, and the amount you would have to pay each month to pay off the balance in three years.

CREDIT CARD REGULATION. The Credit Card Accountability, Responsibility, and Disclosure Act (also called Credit CARD Act) of 2009 was passed in an effort to ensure that consumers who use credit card services are treated fairly and have access to complete information about the fees and other provisions of the credit agreement.

TIPS WHEN USING CREDIT CARDS. Credit cards should be used with discipline. You should impose your own credit limits rather than spend up to the limit granted by the card issuer. You should avoid financing costs, either by using income to cover the amount due or by withdrawing money from savings if necessary.

HOW CREDIT MANAGEMENT FITS WITHIN YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Although access to credit is beneficial, discipline in the use of credit by imposing limits is important. In this way, you will have greater access to credit in the future, which can help you to achieve your financial goals.
Review Questions
CREDIT CARDS. What are three advantages of using a credit card? Can you think of any disadvantages?

APPLYING FOR CREDIT. What information will you need to supply when applying for credit? What kinds of attributes are creditors looking for? Do you need to have all these attributes to get credit?

RETAIL CREDIT CARDS. Describe the differences between a credit card such as MasterCard or Visa and a retail (or proprietary) card. How do credit and retail cards generate revenue? What is the biggest disadvantage of one type of proprietary card?

CREDIT LIMIT. What is a credit limit? How can you increase your credit limit?

CREDIT CARD FEES. What are some common credit card fees?

CREDIT CARD INCENTIVES. Discuss how credit cards offer incentives to use the cards. How else might credit card companies reward cardholders with excellent credit ratings?

GRACE PERIOD. What is a grace period? How can you use it to your advantage?

FINANCE CHARGE. When is a finance charge applied to credit purchases? What is the common range of interest rates on credit cards?

CASH ADVANCE. What is a cash advance? How are cash advances commonly obtained? Discuss interest rates and grace periods with regard to cash advances.

SIMPLE INTEREST. How does the interest rate affect your credit payments? What is meant by simple interest? What is the annual percentage rate (APR), and when is it used?

CREDIT CARD STATEMENT. List some items that appear on the credit card statement. What accounts for the difference between your previous balance and your new balance?

CREDIT CARD ACT. What are the three major impacts of the Credit CARD Act?

COMPARING CREDIT CARDS. What should you consider when comparing credit cards?

REWARDS CARDS. List some examples of common rewards offered to cardholders.

BALANCE TRANSFER CARDS. How can a balance transfer card help you save money?

USING CREDIT CARDS. List five tips for using credit cards wisely.

CREDIT CARDS AS A SOURCE OF FUNDS. Should you view credit cards as a source of funds? Why or why not? Why should you self-impose a tight credit limit?

CREDIT CARD BALANCE. Why is paying your credit card balance in full so important? What should you do if you can’t avoid credit card debt? Explain.

CREDIT MANAGEMENT DECISIONS. What credit management decisions should be included in your financial plan?

CREDIT CARD USE. Discuss some ways that charging large amounts on your credit cards might affect your overall financial planning.

CREDIT CARD FINANCE CHARGES. Briefly describe how credit card interest is computed using the average daily balance method.

INTEREST ON CREDIT CARDS. Compare the amount of interest you earn on typical money market investments versus the amount of interest paid on credit cards.

DEALING WITH AN EXCESSIVE CREDIT CARD BALANCE. Propose possible solutions to reduce an excessive credit card balance.

CREDIT REPAIR SERVICES. Explain why it is not advisable to use credit repair services.

CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU. Describe the role of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

SECURED CREDIT CARDS. How does a secured credit card differ from a standard unsecured credit card? Under what circumstances would you need a secured credit card?

PREPAID CREDIT CARDS. What is a prepaid credit card? How does it differ from a secured credit card?

OVERLIMIT PROTECTION. What is overlimit protection? Explain why consumers should use this feature sparingly.

LATE FEES. Explain how the Credit CARD Act changed the way credit card issuers assess late fees.

CASH ADVANCES. Explain why getting a cash advance on your credit card is a costly source of funds.

REVIEWING YOUR STATEMENT. Why should you review your credit card statement before paying the bill? What steps should you take if you discover an error?

CARDHOLDER RESTRICTIONS. What credit restrictions apply to persons under age 21?

COLLEGE STUDENTS AND CREDIT CARDS. List the advantages and disadvantages of college students using credit card



