Chapter 7Assessing and Securing Your Credit

Oleg Mikhaylov/Shutterstock

Kim avoided using credit. She paid cash for everything, including two cars in the past. When it came time to buy her third car, Kim wanted to finance part of the cost. After applying for credit, she was treated to a rude awakening. The finance company used a three-tier credit rating system. An A-level credit rating was the highest, and the buyer received a 7% interest rate. The B-level buyer received a 9% rate. Kim only qualified for the C-level, at an 11% rate. She was stunned. How could she have such a low rating when she had never been late paying any bills?

As it turns out, having no credit history looks as bad to a credit rating agency as having a bad credit history. You might think that not having to borrow money would demonstrate fiscal responsibility. Not so to a credit rating bureau.

The first part of this chapter focuses on obtaining credit. You’ll discover that a good credit history is built by the proper use and control of credit, not the absence of credit. The second part of the chapter deals with identity theft: how it can affect your credit rating and how you can protect yourself from it.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Provide background information on credit.

Describe the role of credit bureaus.

Provide background information on identity theft.

Explain how to protect against identity theft.

Discuss how to respond to identity theft.

Explain how credit assessment and security fit within your financial plan.
Background on Credit
Credit represents funds a creditor provides to a borrower that the borrower will repay in the future with interest. The funds borrowed are sometimes referred to as the principal, so we segment repayment of credit into interest and principal payments. Credit is frequently extended to borrowers as a loan with set terms such as the amount of credit provided and the maturity date when the credit will be repaid. For most types of loans, interest payments are made periodically (such as every month), and the principal payment is made at the maturity date, when the loan is to be terminated.

credit
Funds provided by a creditor to a borrower that will be repaid by the borrower in the future with interest.

Types of Credit
Credit can be classified as noninstallment, installment, or revolving open-end.

Noninstallment Credit
Noninstallment credit is normally issued for a very short time, such as 30 days or less. It is provided by some retail stores to consumers who want to purchase products today and need credit for a very short period of time. The consumers are granted credit to make specific purchases and will have to repay the amount borrowed soon. Noninstallment credit is useful for consumers who expect to receive enough income in the near future to cover the amount of credit they are granted.

noninstallment credit
Credit provided for a short period, such as retail store credit.

Installment Credit
Installment credit (also referred to as an installment loan) is also provided for specific purchases, but the borrower has a longer time (such as a few years) to repay the loan. Interest is charged on the amount borrowed, and monthly payments of interest and principal must be made. Alternatively, monthly payments can be structured so that the borrower pays only interest until the maturity date, when the balance of the loan is due.

installment credit
Credit provided for specific purchases, with interest charged on the amount borrowed.

Revolving Open-End Credit
Revolving open-end credit, such as credit cards, allows consumers to borrow up to a specified maximum amount (such as $1,000 or $10,000). The credit limit is determined by the borrower’s income level, debt level, and credit payment history. The consumer can pay the entire amount that is borrowed at the end of the month or pay a portion of the balance, and interest will be charged on the remaining balance. Typically, at least a minimum payment must be paid each month.

revolving open-end credit
Credit provided up to a specified maximum amount based on income and credit history; interest is charged each month on the remaining balance.

Should you use credit? Consider the advantages and disadvantages of credit.

Advantages of Using Credit
The appropriate use of credit helps you build a good credit history. Only by using credit wisely can you create the capacity to access credit in the future for large purchases such as a home or a car. Another advantage is that credit eliminates the need for carrying cash or writing checks.

Disadvantages of Using Credit
There can be a high cost to using credit. Access to credit can be a disadvantage because it may result in overspending or a large accumulation of debt.

Overspending
The behavior of some consumers is completely different when they pay with a credit card versus having to pull cash out of their wallet to make a payment. The credit card gives a feeling of freedom, as if it allows consumers to avoid the cost of purchases.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance
Example
While at the mall today, Lisa saw a pair of Italian shoes that she liked. The shoes cost $300 and were not on sale. Lisa did not need the shoes but decided to buy them because she did not see anything else at the mall that she wanted. Before purchasing the shoes, Lisa used her smartphone and determined that she could purchase the same shoes online for $100 less, but she would have to wait several days for them to be delivered, and she wanted them now. Lisa was also aware that the shoe store periodically has 40% off sales, so she could likely buy the shoes at the sale price if she were willing to wait. Lisa did not have any cash with her, so she used her credit card to pay for the shoes. Lisa’s purchase decision was primarily influenced by her desire for immediate satisfaction. She knew that she could have waited until the shoes were on sale, but she went to the mall intending to purchase something that day. Lisa’s purchase decision was especially easy because she used credit instead of cash. Thus, she was able to make the purchase and still have all her cash that she can use for other future purchases.

Now reconsider Lisa’s decision if she had just cashed her weekly $300 paycheck and if she did not have a credit card with her. She could pull the $300 from her wallet to pay for the shoes. However, she would be unwilling to use all her week’s pay to buy a pair of shoes that she does not need. She worked hard to earn that $300 and wants more from her income than this pair of shoes. She might only consider using her cash to pay for the shoes if they were on sale, but even under those conditions, she would likely decide to use her cash for other purposes.

The point of this example is that some consumers have less control over their spending when using a credit card. They are tempted to purchase products they do not need and to overpay when purchasing products because the credit card makes them feel like they are not really spending money. Conversely, more psychological pain is associated with using cash to make purchases than with using a credit card, even if the amount of the payment is the same. Therefore, consumers make spending decisions more carefully when using cash. They tend to recognize that their cash was earned, that they have a limited amount of it, and that spending their cash now may prevent them from affording other products later. Thus, the use of cash imposes a limit on the amount of their spending.

Access to credit can also affect the types of purchases that consumers make. Consumers are more willing to select the more expensive options when they use credit instead of cash at the time they make their decision.

Accumulation of Debt
Another disadvantage of credit cards is that they can cause some consumers to accumulate too much debt. Some consumers frequently use credit cards for their purchases and pay the minimum amount required each month. Consequently, their debt accumulates. This problem is made worse because of the high interest rate they are paying on the balance owed.

Your spending decisions today can influence the amount of credit you need and therefore affect the amount of debt that you will have to repay in the future. Your ability to save money in the future is also affected by large credit payments, as illustrated in Exhibit 7.1. If your spending and credit card payments exceed your net cash flows, you will need to withdraw savings to cover the deficiency.

Exhibit 7.1 Impact of Credit Payments on Saving

Figure 7.1 Full Alternative Text
Credit Rights
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1974 prohibits creditors from denying credit due to sex, gender, sexual orientation, age, race, color, national origin, religion, marital status, and certain other factors. It requires creditors to notify applicants within 30 days of a credit application whether they will receive credit. If credit is denied, creditors must explain the reason for the denial.

The Financial Reform Act (also called the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act) of 2010 established the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to regulate specific financial services for consumer, including online checking accounts, credit cards, and student loans. The CFPB can set rules to ensure that information regarding endorsements of specific financial products is accurate and to prevent deceptive practices. It may also regulate the credit rating bureaus (discussed in the next section).

Credit History
Your credit history is a record of how you have used credit, including whether your payments have ever been late. If you have a credit card or have obtained a bank loan, perhaps to purchase a car, the amount and timing of your payments will be in your credit history.

Even if you have never had a credit card or bank loan, you will have a credit history if you have rented an apartment. You receive credit when you use utilities such as water, electric power, and telephone services. The utility company extends credit by providing a service, and you are billed at the end of a period (such as one month). In this way, utility companies provide a form of short-term credit. To obtain this credit, you normally must make an initial deposit at the time the account is created. When you have accounts with utility companies, you develop a credit history that documents how timely you are in paying your bills. You can establish a favorable credit history by paying your utility bills on or before the due date. Doing so indicates to potential creditors that you may also repay other credit in a timely manner. Similarly, paying your rent on time each month will have a positive effect on your credit record.

Credit Insurance
Because access to credit is essential today, some consumers purchase credit insurance to make sure they will be able to keep making credit payments (and therefore maintain their credit rating) under adverse conditions. With credit insurance, an insurance company will cover their monthly credit payments if various conditions such as illness or unemployment occur. For instance, credit accident and health insurance ensures monthly credit payments for consumers during periods when they cannot work due to an accident or illness. Credit unemployment insurance ensures monthly payments for consumers during periods when they are unemployed.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.thebalance.com and search for topics on managing credit.

To get
Information about how to establish credit.
Credit Bureaus
Credit bureaus provide credit reports that document your credit payment history. Your credit report shows every time you apply for credit, whether you pay your bills on time, whether you maintain balances on your accounts, and whether you pay late fees. It may also contain information about public records such as bankruptcies and court judgments and identify inquiries made by various companies and potential employers about your credit rating. The three primary credit bureaus are Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion.

credit reports
Reports provided by credit bureaus to document a person’s credit payment history.

Your credit report is important because it can determine whether you are able to obtain credit. It may also influence the interest rate that you pay when you borrow money. The better your credit report, the lower the interest rate you are charged for financing, and thus your interest payments to pay off loans will be lower. Because a better credit report reduces your financing costs, it allows you to use a larger proportion of your income for other purposes. Your credit report can affect other aspects of your life as well. Landlords may obtain your credit report when you apply to rent an apartment, and insurance companies commonly check your credit report when you apply for insurance on your car. The phone company may review your credit report when you obtain a contract for service for your smartphone. Furthermore, employers increasingly are obtaining credit reports on applicants for job positions, so it could even affect your career.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
The web site www.ftc.gov

To get
Advice and guidance about your credit report.

Because your credit report is so important, you should know what is in your report. Free credit reports are accessible to all U.S. consumers. You may order one free copy of your credit report from each of the nationwide consumer bureaus every 12 months. You must provide your name, address, Social Security number, and date of birth. (You might be asked for additional personal information for security reasons.) If you have all of this information, you can get immediate access to your credit report by requesting your report online at www.annualcreditreport.com. Phone and mail requests are processed and the report is mailed to you within 15 days of receipt. Otherwise, you may need to research other options for access. For example, you may be able to use an Individual Taxpayer Identification number instead of a Social Security number. When you go to the website to request your free credit report, you may also be offered various other products and services such as a credit score and credit monitoring; be careful to read the fine print with all of these offers because many of them charge a fee.

Many other websites advertise free credit reports. However, they may only provide the credit report if you subscribe to various types of credit services, for which they may charge fees.

Credit Reports Provided by Credit Bureaus
Exhibit 7.2 shows an example of the types of information that appear in a credit report. Each credit bureau uses a somewhat different format. In addition, the specific information about you may vary among the reports, although all three credit bureaus tend to focus on the same type of information. Review Exhibit 7.2, and notice the following six sections:

The report number and the date distinguish this report from other reports.

Identifying information such as your name, your spouse’s name, your date of birth, your Social Security number, your current and previous addresses, your occupation, and your current or previous employers appears in this section.

Potentially negative information from public records, such as bankruptcy filings and tax liens, is included in your credit report.

If any unpaid accounts have been turned over to a collection agency, they will be listed in this part of the credit report. Note that any resolution is recorded as well.

All your accounts, both open and closed, are listed on your credit report. The report details when the accounts were opened, how long they have been open, the highest amount you have ever charged, and each account’s current status. It also shows how many late payments you have made and how late they were.

The inquiries section lists the companies that have requested your credit report.
Exhibit 7.2 A Sample Credit Report
Figure 7.2 Full Alternative Text
Correcting Credit Report Mistakes
If you find inaccurate information in your credit report, send a letter to the credit bureau that issued the credit report. Send your letter by certified mail “return receipt requested” so that you will have a record that the company received your letter. Identify the specific information that you believe is incorrect and explain why the information is incorrect. Include copies of any receipts that support your claim. For example, if the credit report indicates that you did not pay a specific bill, include a copy of the receipt that proves you paid the bill.

A credit bureau is required to investigate your claim within 30 days. It will forward the proof you provided to the firm that initially filed the information with the consumer reporting company. This firm is required to review your claim and respond to the consumer reporting company about whether they agree with your claim. Then the credit bureau will decide whether your claim is justified. If so, it will remove the inaccurate information from the credit report and will send you a free copy of the revised credit report. In addition, you can ask the credit bureau to send the revised credit report to any person or company who requested and received this credit report within the last six months. If the problem is not resolved at this point, you can ask that a statement of the dispute be included in your credit report. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, described earlier in this chapter, regulates the credit bureaus. This may ensure that any mistakes made on credit reports are quickly corrected.

Credit Score
In addition to the credit report, each credit bureau also calculates a credit score, which is a rating that indicates a person’s creditworthiness. The rating reflects the likelihood that an individual will be able to make credit payments in a timely manner.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Last month, Stephanie Spratt took advantage of her right to request a credit report from each of the credit bureaus. She was surprised to see how the reports varied. One of the bureaus recorded a late payment on a bill from a utility company about nine months ago. This single late payment did not severely affect her credit rating, but Stephanie did not want it on her record because she always pays her bills on time. She sent the credit bureau a letter with a copy of the check that proved her payment to the utility company was not late. The bureau removed the claim of a late payment from her record, and her credit score increased slightly. Stephanie learned from this experience that she should periodically check her credit rating, as it can affect her access to credit and the interest rate she may pay when obtaining credit.

Lenders commonly assess the credit payment history provided by one or more credit bureaus when deciding whether to extend a personal loan. For example, financial institutions may rely on this information when they decide whether to approve your credit card application, provide you with a car loan, or provide you with a home (mortgage) loan. Your credit score can also affect the interest rate that is quoted on the loan that you request. A high score could reduce your interest rate substantially, which may translate into savings of thousands of dollars in interest expenses over time. The score that is most commonly used by lenders to assess your creditworthiness is known as a FICO score because it is based on a model created by the Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO). Each of the three credit bureaus relies on the FICO model to create the FICO score that it provides to lenders.

The FICO score is based on several factors. The exact weighting applied to each factor in determining a FICO score can vary among people depending on their credit history. In addition, the weighting of factors as applied to a specific person may change over time response to changes in their credit reports. Nevertheless, some generalizations can be provided here about the most important factors for determining a person’s FICO score.

Credit Payment History
The most important factor determining your FICO score is your credit payment history, which makes up 35% of the score. If you have paid your bills on time over the last seven years, you will receive a high rating on that portion of your credit score. Measurements of your payment history may include your record of paying off credit in a timely manner, amounts past due on any delinquent accounts, the length of time that any accounts were delinquent, and the status of delinquent accounts (whether they have been paid off).

Not all bills are included in the FICO score credit payment history. Credit card, installment loan, mortgage, and retail store payments are included, but payments to utilities generally are not, unless they are so late that the utility turns them over to a collection agency. All bankruptcies and foreclosures are included. Closing an account will not remove it from your credit payment history, so if you have frequently been late in making your credit card payments, canceling that card will not immediately remove your late payments from your history.

Credit Utilization
Credit utilization, the amount of available credit that you use each month, makes up 30% of the credit score on average. If you typically owe an amount that represents most of the credit that you were granted, you will receive a lower score. For example, if the limit on your credit card is $1,000, and you always run a balance of $900, you are utilizing 90% of your available credit. In contrast, if you have the same credit limit but charge only $200 per month and pay the bill in full when it arrives, you are not using much of your credit and will receive a higher score. This situation suggests that you have access to credit, but you have enough discipline not to use it. Note, however, that even though you pay your balance in full each month, the credit report is likely to report the balance that you owed because the credit card company reports the balance due before the payment is received. Therefore, if you use most of your credit every month, your score may be slightly lower even though you pay your balance in full.

Credit History
The length of your credit history makes up 15% of the FICO score on average. Measurement of your credit history may include the time since your accounts were opened and the length of your relationship with creditors. In general, longer-term relationships with your creditors are perceived to be more favorable.

New Credit
New credit account information makes up 10% of the FICO score on average. Measurement of new credit may include the number of new accounts that you opened recently, the proportion of new accounts relative to your older accounts, the number of recent inquiries by credit card companies and other lenders (which may be in response to your applications), and the time since any recent accounts were opened. In general, more new accounts and inquiries may result in a lower score because they suggest that you may need additional credit, possibly because of financial problems. The FICO score model does take into account that people looking for a mortgage or a loan for a new car may apply to several lenders to try to obtain the lowest possible rate. Therefore, several inquiries of this type in a short period will not affect your score. Nevertheless, if you are just starting to obtain credit (after graduating from college and starting a new job, for example), applying for several different credit cards at once could lower your score. Obtaining your credit report to check its accuracy will not affect your score.

Credit Mix
The use of different types of credit makes up 10% of the FICO score on average. Types of credit include credit card loans, retail accounts, installment loans, mortgages, and finance company loans. This factor is the least important, although people who have no credit cards and few other types of credit are generally considered higher risk than people who have several types of credit and use them responsibly.

Overall, if you make your credit payments on time, maintain a low level of debt, and have demonstrated your ability to make timely credit payments for many years, you are likely to receive a very high credit score. The credit score is not allowed to reflect your sex, gender, sexual orientation, race, color, religion, national origin, marital status, or certain other factors.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.fico.com/en/products/fico-score

To get
More information about FICO credit scores.

Different Credit Scores
Although people tend to speak of their “credit score,” in practice, a person may have 60 or more credit scores. Although all three of the credit bureaus rely on the FICO model to determine your credit score, you may be assigned a different score by each bureau. The differences occur because the bureaus may not receive the same information about you. One bureau could have received information from a furniture store that your last two finance payments were late, while that information was not reported to the other two bureaus. In this case, your credit score from that bureau would likely be slightly lower than your scores from the other credit bureaus. In addition, different creditors report information to the credit bureaus at different times, and the credit bureaus incorporate the information into their reports at different times. Therefore, information used in calculating your credit score at one credit bureau may not be used in calculating your score at the other credit bureaus until a week or so later.

The differences in credit scores among the bureaus could cause some individuals to be approved for a loan based on the credit bureau that provided the highest credit score but not be approved based on the credit bureau that provided the lowest score. In addition, some financial institutions obtain information about a credit applicant from all three credit bureaus, so if one of the bureaus reports low credit score, the lender may be more cautious in providing credit. This is another reason why you should review your credit report from each credit bureau regularly to ensure that the information is accurate.

In addition to the main credit score, each credit bureau uses the FICO model as the basis for calculating several more specialized credit scores to be used for particular types of lending. For example, there are separate credit scores for mortgages, auto loans, and many other types of credit. In calculating a score to be used by providers of auto loans, for example, a credit bureau would give heavier weight to whether the individual had been late in paying off a previous auto loan or had a car repossessed. Similarly, a score to be used by mortgage lenders would be heavily influenced by the individual’s history of mortgage payments.

VantageScore
VantageScore is an alternative to the FICO scoring system. Like the FICO score, the VantageScore is intended to measure the likelihood that the credit applicant will repay debt in a timely manner. Although VantageScore and FICO consider many of the same characteristics, such as credit utilization and history, there are differences. VantageScore weights mortgage payments more heavily than FICO, is more lenient in its treatment of medical bills that are sent to a debt collection agency, and makes allowances for credit problems experienced by people as a result of natural disasters. It also considers utility, rent, and phone payments as part of an individual’s credit history, whereas FICO does not include these payments. Consequently, people who are just beginning to establish a credit history and individuals who have late payments or unpaid bills as a result of a major illness or a natural disaster are likely to have higher VantageScores than FICO scores. Individuals who have just recently begun using credit are likely to receive a VantageScore credit rating before they receive a FICO credit rating.

Most lenders rely on FICO scores in assessing applicants for mortgages and other types of credit. For many individuals, however, there is not a significant difference between their VantageScores and their FICO scores. Individuals with a very high FICO score would likely receive a very high VantageScore, and those with a very low FICO score would likely receive a very low VantageScore.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Monitoring Your Credit Score
Application
The Intuit Credit Karma app (by Credit Karma, Inc.) provides your credit score, information to help you form a plan to raise your score, and monitoring tools for your credit accounts.

To Find It
Search for the Intuit Credit Karma app on your mobile device.

How Credit Scores Vary among Generations
Experian offers insight into how credit scores vary among age brackets:

Age Bracket	Average FICO Score
77
+
760
58–77	742
42–57	706
26–41	687
18–25	679
In general, people in the older age brackets have higher credit scores. People in the lower two age brackets have lower average FICO scores, which may be attributed to the relatively large amount of credit used compared to their credit limit and to their income level.

Checking Your Credit Scores
You are entitled to receive a free copy of your credit report from each of the three credit bureaus each year. Certain credit cards will provide free FICO scores, as will some banks. Some auto loan companies provide access to your FICO score, and some types of student loans will provide your score. Some banks, credit card companies, and other lenders may provide a credit score, but it will be the specialized credit score used by that particular type of lender. The specialized scores may have a range that differs from the main FICO score range.

Some websites claim to offer free credit scores but actually are trying to persuade consumers to sign up for expensive services. If you are asked to provide a credit card number at a website offering free credit scores, the credit score probably is not free. Some websites do provide free credit scores, but the score they provide is your VantageScore, not your FICO score. One of the most popular free sites is Credit Karma (www.creditkarma.com). Credit Karma will not ask for your credit card number, but it will ask you to provide some personal information including your Social Security number. Each time you log in to Credit Karma, you will see your updated VantageScore based on information provided by the three credit bureaus. Because Credit Karma monitors your credit reports to give  you an updated score, it also provides free alerts whenever there is activity in your report, such as an inquiry by a new lender or a new account opened in your name. To pay for these services, Credit Karma will give you recommendations for credit cards that accept applicants with similar credit scores. If you apply for one of the recommended cards, Credit Karma receives a commission from the credit card company.

Although the free VantageScores provided by Credit Karma and the free specialized credit scores provided by some lenders are not identical to the FICO scores provided by the credit bureaus, they are still useful because they generally move in the same direction as FICO scores. If your free credit score is declining month after month, your FICO score probably is declining, too, and you can take steps to try to improve it.

Interpreting Credit Scores
The range of credit scores for FICO and VantageScore is between 300 and 850. Exhibit 7.3 shows the percentage of the population that falls into the various ranges for FICO scores. A score of 800 and above not only ensures easy access to credit but also may allow you to obtain credit at the lowest possible interest rate. A score of 740 to 799 is considered very good, while a score of 670 to 739 is good. Applicants with such scores may have to pay a somewhat higher interest rate than those with the highest scores.

Exhibit 7.3 National Distribution of FICO Scores

Figure 7.3 Full Alternative Text
Each financial institution sets its own criteria to determine whether to extend credit. Some financial institutions may require a minimum score of 580, whereas others require a minimum of 620. Ratings in the 600 to 649 range may cause some creditors to reject applications. Other creditors may be willing to extend credit in this range but may charge a higher interest rate.

An acceptable credit score may vary with the type of credit (credit card, car loan, home loan, and so forth) that you are seeking. Although lenders commonly rely on credit information and a credit score from a credit bureau, they also consider other information not disclosed by credit bureaus. For example, a person with a high credit score from a credit bureau but a relatively low income may not be approved for a specific loan that would require large payments each month.

Improving Your Credit Score
A low credit score is normally due to either missed payments or carrying an excessive amount of debt, both of which will be noted on your credit report. A poor credit history will appear on your credit report for 7 years; filing for bankruptcy will remain on your record for 7 to 10 years depending on the type of bankruptcy.

You can begin to improve your score immediately by catching up on late payments, making at least the minimum payments on time, and reducing your debt. You might also consider the following steps:

Review your household budget, and cut back on all unnecessary expenditures.

Destroy your credit cards so you won’t be tempted to add to your debt. Keep your accounts open, however, because part of your credit rating is determined by how much credit you have and what percentage of it you use. If you reduce the amount of credit you have by closing accounts but maintain the same amount of debt, your credit utilization percentage will increase, and your credit score could be negatively affected.

Call your creditors immediately if you won’t be able to make your payments on time. If you have missed payments in the past but can afford to make them now, ask your creditors if they will report your account “paid as agreed” to the credit bureau.

As you show a pattern of making payments on time and managing your credit responsibly, your credit score will improve. It may take a few years to completely rebuild your credit, however. Many companies advertise that they can improve your credit score. However, these companies cannot remove any accurate negative information from the credit report. And if the information in your credit report is not accurate, you can have that information removed without paying a company to do it for you.

FREE APPS for Personal Finance

Improving Your Credit Score
Application
The TransUnion Credit Monitoring app (by TransUnion) can offer insight on how you can improve your credit score. TransUnion is one of the credit bureaus.

To Find It
Search for the TransUnion Credit Monitoring app on your mobile device.

There are some credit counseling organizations that can help you improve your credit score. They may help you establish a plan to repay existing debt over time. They may also help you establish a budget and develop a detailed financial plan for the future. Although some credit counselors are reputable and can be helpful, the Federal Trade Commission warns that others (even some claiming to be “nonprofit”) charge high fees and provide little assistance. You can find nonprofit counseling agencies through the National Foundation for Credit Counseling, but before you select an agency, check its reputation with your state attorney general and state consumer protection agency. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau provides information about credit counseling and advice on selecting a credit counselor.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.nfcc.org

To get
Information about credit counseling. Identity Theft: A Threat to Your Credit
Identity theft occurs when any individual, without your permission, uses such personal identifying information as your Social Security number, driver’s license number, credit card account numbers, bank account numbers, or any other information unique to you, including your name and date of birth, to obtain personal gain. Criminals can use stolen account numbers to empty your bank accounts or charge purchases to your credit cards. They may also use stolen personal information to open accounts in your name. If you are a victim of identity theft, any purchases charged to the accounts appear under your name. When these accounts go unpaid, the delinquent accounts are reported on your credit report. Meanwhile, you are not even aware that these accounts exist. Your credit score may be reduced to the point at which you no longer have access to credit.

identity theft
Theft that occurs when an individual, without permission, uses your identifying information for their personal gain.

In some instances of identity theft, the criminal is not attempting to acquire money, goods, or services. The object instead is to obtain documents such as a driver’s license, birth certificate, Social Security card, passport, visa, and other official government documents. These documents can be used to establish a new identity unknown to the authorities to facilitate various criminal activities. In one case, a known drug dealer used such documents to avoid detection when entering and leaving the United States. Although the drug dealer’s victim did not suffer a direct financial loss, he had to carry extensive documentation to prove to immigration officials whenever he traveled outside the country to prove he was not the drug dealer.

More than 15 million people in the United States are victims of identity theft each year, at an estimated cost of about $16 billion. People of all ages and socioeconomic classes are at risk from this increasingly common crime. Consider the following recent cases:

Experian, the credit bureau, revealed that hackers had gained access to its database containing the names, Social Security numbers, addresses, and other identifying information of 143 million Americans. Such information would be sufficient to open new credit accounts in the victims’ names. In addition, the hackers obtained the credit card numbers of 290,000 consumers.

The credit card numbers of 40 million customers at Target and 56 million customers at Home Depot were compromised when hackers broke into databases at those companies. The credit card numbers were then sold online. Although the customers were not liable for purchases made with the stolen card numbers, many customers had to get new cards, and both companies faced considerable expenses in upgrading their systems and trying to restore their reputations.

A ring of thieves in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut stole credit card numbers from thousands of shoppers while serving as cashiers and clerks at pharmacies, shoe stores, and other retail businesses. The thieves used credit card information to manufacture fraudulent cards.

In these instances alone, millions of individuals were potentially affected, and some were victimized financially by the identity thieves.

The Cost of Identity Theft
The personal cost of identity theft is difficult to measure but easy to imagine, beginning with the victim’s feeling of being violated and the resulting insecurity. Identity theft victims have been turned down for employment because of incorrect information found in background checks, and their accounts have been turned over to collection agencies for nonpayment of mortgages and student loans obtained by identity thieves. They have been refused loans for which they would normally have qualified, and had their driver’s licenses revoked for violations they did not commit.

According to the Federal Trade Commission, the average individual loss due to identity theft is more than $1,000. Time is lost as well. Recent estimates suggest the average victim spends 200 hours dealing with the damage control necessitated by identity theft.

Identity Theft Tactics
Aside from hacked databases, identity theft most commonly results from lost or stolen wallets. However, many other tactics can be used to obtain your personal data.

Shoulder Surfing
Shoulder surfing occurs in public places where you can be readily seen or heard by someone standing close. An example of shoulder surfing is someone standing near you in a hotel or other business establishment and reading the number off your credit card if it is left lying on the counter for too long.

shoulder surfing
Tactic used when an identity thief stands close to you in a public place and reads the number of your credit card as you conduct business.

Dumpster Diving
As the name implies, dumpster diving occurs when the identity thief goes through your trash. The identity thief is looking for things such as credit card receipts, which contain your credit card number, and preapproved credit card solicitations. They contact credit card company to change the address and then obtain a card in your name. Other targets include discarded information that might contain your Social Security number or bank account numbers.

dumpster diving
Tactic used when an identity thief goes through your trash for discarded items that reveal personal information that can be used for fraudulent purposes.

The dumpster diver may also retrieve similar personal information from the dumpsters of places where you do business. For example, let us say that you complete a credit card application at a local store. If this credit card application, which contains substantial personal and financial information, is disposed of in the company’s dumpster, it can be found and used by a dumpster diver. Other dumpsters that could provide usable information are those of your health care providers, your broker, your accountant, and even your bank.

Skimming and Shimming
Skimming occurs when identity thieves steal your credit or debit card number by copying the information contained in the magnetic strip on the card. Often, skimmers are employees in stores and restaurants who, when you are not looking, swipe your card through a reader that captures and stores the data. Skimmers also attach card readers to ATMs, so that when you swipe your card for access, they collect your information and use the data to create fake debit and credit cards.

Skimming has declined since the introduction of EMV technology, which replaced the magnetic strip on credit cards with an embedded chip. Every time an EMV card is used for payment or at an ATM, the chip creates a unique transaction code that cannot be used again. As a result, even if a thief or hacker manages to steal the chip information from one transaction, the information cannot be used for another transaction or to create a fake card. Thus, EMV technology has significantly reduced fraud involving credit and debit cards.

skimming
Tactic used when a store employee steals your credit card number by copying the information contained in the magnetic strip on the card.

Nevertheless, thieves have developed a new technique called shimming. They insert a device called a shimmer into the slot on an ATM or card reader so that it is invisible. The shimmer can read the information on an inserted card, and although the EMV technology prevents the thieves from cloning an actual chip card, they can create a card that is close enough to fool banks or merchants who are not being careful about card security.

shimming
Tactic of inserting a device (called a shimmer) into the slot on an ATM or card reader that can read the information on an inserted card, allowing identify thieves to create a credit card that is close enough to the real card that it may fool some banks or merchants.

Pretexting, Phishing, and Pharming
Another method of obtaining personal information is pretexting. This occurs when individuals access personal information under false pretenses. The pretexter may use information obtained from dumpster diving to gain information about the companies with which you do business. The pretexter may pose as a survey taker or as an employee of a financial institution, insurance company, or other firm with which you have an account. You may be asked for information such as your Social Security number or driver’s license, bank, brokerage, or credit card numbers. The pretexter will say that the information is being solicited to update your file or for other routine business. Pretexters may use the information to steal your identity, or they may sell it to others for illegal use.

pretexting
Tactic used when an identity thief poses as an employee of a company with which you conduct business to solicit your personal information.

When pretexting happens online, it is called phishing. A phisher sends an e-mail message falsely claiming to be from a legitimate source that directs the recipient to a website, where they are then asked to update account information such as passwords, credit card numbers, bank account numbers, and Social Security numbers. The website, in reality, is fake.

phishing
Tactic used when pretexting happens online. A practice that is similar to phishing but reaches many more targets with a single effort is known as pharming. By manipulating e-mail viruses and host files, pharmers redirect users, without their knowledge, from the legitimate commercial websites they thought they were visiting to bogus ones that look like the genuine sites. When users enter their login names and passwords, the pharmers collect the data.

pharming
Similar to phishing, but targeted to larger audiences; tactic that directs users to bogus websites to collect their personal information.

Abusing Legitimate Access to Records
Other sources of data are the employees of places where you work, bank, go to the doctor, and shop. In many cases, these employees have easy and legitimate access to personal information that can be used to steal your identity.

For anyone who has gone through a divorce, most if not all personal financial information, including Social Security numbers, is included in the court records. In most states, this information is considered part of the public record.

Crime Rings
In some cases, identity thieves may be part of a well-organized crime ring that has systematically infiltrated corporations and financial institutions for the purpose of obtaining information to facilitate large-scale identity thefts.

Violating Your Mailbox
A last source of information worth mentioning is your mailbox. Both incoming and outgoing mail may provide the information needed for your identity to be stolen. Outgoing mail can provide credit card and bank information if you leave letters in your mailbox for the postal carrier to pick up. Incoming mail can also provide your credit card account numbers, bank information, driver’s license number, and Social Security number. 
Protecting Against Identity Theft
There are many ways that you can safeguard your personal information and make it harder for an identity thief to prey on you. Most of these safeguards are relatively easy to install and inexpensive.

Shielding Personal Information at Home
Consider the following methods to safeguard your personal information:

When establishing passwords online, do not use your mother’s maiden name, the last four digits of your Social Security number, your birthday, street address, wedding anniversary, or any other readily available information that the identity thief may obtain.

Go through your wallet or purse and remove anything that contains your Social Security number, including your Social Security card. Other items that you should not carry, unless absolutely necessary, are your passport, birth certificate, and rarely used credit cards. Also, be sure that you are not carrying any account passwords or PINs in your wallet. Make a photocopy of the items that remain in your wallet or purse (both the front and back of the documents) and retain these records in a secure location, such as a safety deposit box or fireproof strong box.

Document your accounts. For all credit cards that you have, whether or not you carry them in your wallet, keep a list of the name of the company, credit card number, and toll-free phone number in a secure location. Keep a list of all bank account numbers, brokerage account numbers, and their respective 800 numbers in a secure location as well.

Buy a shredder and use it. When you receive preapproved credit card applications, shred them. When you dispose of out-of-date receipts from credit cards, shred them.

Do not have your Social Security number printed on your checks.

Remove your name and address from local phone directories and reverse directories (that is, directories listing phone numbers in numerical order with names and addresses attached).

Shop online only when there is evidence of a secured website. An “s” at the end of the web address (https://) and/or a padlock icon indicates a secure site.

Be suspicious of any phone callers seeking to verify or update your personal information. If in doubt, tell the caller you will call back. Obtain the solicitor’s name and phone number and then call the company to verify the caller’s credentials.

Consider using online bill payment systems. If you pay by mail, consider mailing all bills with remittance stubs containing account data in a U.S. Postal Service depository box. Do not leave them in your mailbox, even if it is a locked box. Some experts go so far as to recommend that such sensitive information be mailed only at a post office.

Check your accounts regularly for suspicious activity. You can check online or use mobile apps to visit most accounts. Experts recommend reviewing your accounts at least twice a week. Whether you receive your bank and credit card statements online or by mail, scrutinize every statement on the day you receive it. The earlier identity theft is detected, the less damage there will be to repair on your financial record.

Take care when using smartphones to order merchandise. These calls usually require you to give a credit card account number for payment. There are devices available that allow people to scan and lock in on a signal and steal the information provided in the order.

If you are using a laptop or mobile device for online banking or shopping, avoid connecting to Wi-Fi networks at public hotspots such as coffee shops, hotels, or airports. Wi-Fi in public areas can be used to intercept your device’s signal and collect personal information.

Set up your phone or other mobile device so that you can remotely remove data from it in case it is lost or stolen. Activate the autolock feature on your phone so that it will secure your phone if it is left unused for a certain number of minutes.

Be aware of delivery schedules. If you are expecting delivery of an item, whether it be a new credit card or a purchase you have made with a credit card, and it has not arrived at the expected time, contact the credit card issuer or merchant to determine its status. You will probably be able to track the delivery status online.

Restrict your use of personal checks to payment of bills via the U.S. mail. Do not use personal checks for everyday transactions, as they contain your account number, name, address, and phone number. Some merchants will also require your driver’s license number.

Be careful what you post on social media. Identity thieves can gather a great deal of information about you from social media sites. When members of an identity theft ring were arrested for forging checks, they said they gained information from Instagram, where young people getting their first paycheck would post photos of themselves holding the check. By looking at the photos, the thieves could learn the name, address, and account number of the payor and the bank’s routing number. With that information, they could forge checks. If you are posting information that reveals your birth date or year you graduated from college or other personal information, use privacy settings so that the information will not be generally available. By collecting such bits of information, identity thieves can sometimes create an identity.

Protect your home computer from hackers by installing a firewall and virus protection and updating both frequently. Don’t download programs or open hyperlinks sent to you by people you don’t know. Also, password-protect sensitive personal data.

When on vacation, have your mail held at the post office. Also, secure all personal information within your home to the best of your ability, and while on the road, do not leave credit card slips, PINs, or other sensitive information in unoccupied hotel rooms.

Protecting Personal Information at Work
Consider the following safeguards you can take at your place of employment:

If your employer requires that you wear a photo ID, be sure that it does not display your Social Security number.

Ask if you can have your paycheck direct deposited to your bank account. If your employer uses paper checks, examine your check and stub. If either contains your Social Security number, request that your payroll office truncate this information.

Examine your health insurance card. If it uses your Social Security number as an identifier, discuss the matter with your Human Resources department to determine if an alternative number can be used.
Identity Theft Insurance
Identity theft insurance can be obtained as part of your homeowner’s or renter’s policy or as a stand-alone policy. Some credit card issuers add identity theft insurance as a cardholder benefit.

When obtaining identity theft insurance, low deductibles, reimbursement for lost wages, coverage for legal fees, and the cost associated with the denial of credit are items to consider in your policy selection. Some critics of identity theft insurance point out that the associated losses are seldom catastrophic, which is the reason we typically buy insurance. Still, for $25 to $60 per year (the typical cost of a $10,000 to $15,000 policy) a person may be able to obtain peace of mind in dealing with the cost of identity theft.
Response to Identity Theft
If you are a victim of identity theft, you must take action immediately to clean up your credit report. The FTC has set up a website at www.identitytheft.gov that will take you through the entire process. As you take action, it is essential to maintain a record of who you talk to and correspond with, the organization with which they are affiliated, the date of the conversation or correspondence, the phone number and/or address, and if it is a verbal conversation, notes on the nature of that conversation. If your communication is by mail, fax, or e-mail, keep a copy of the correspondence. If you correspond by certified mail, attach the verification of the receipt to the correspondence. Also, keep copies of all reports (credit, police) that you receive. You will be communicating with a large number of people, and you will need to refer to previous conversations or correspondence to expedite the process. Maintaining a log will prove to be very helpful during this stressful period.

Contact the Police
Contact your local police or sheriff’s department, and obtain a copy of the report for your files.

Contact the FTC
The Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 designated the FTC to function as a central clearinghouse for all identity theft complaints. The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA), enacted in December 2003, required the FTC to create a standard form and procedures for use by consumers in informing creditors and credit bureaus that they are credit theft victims. Both are available at www.identitytheft.gov. When you go to the website, you will first be asked to complete a form describing the type of identity theft that you experienced. Then the FTC will recommend the procedures you should follow.

Contact Credit Reporting Companies
Notify the major credit reporting companies and request that a fraud alert be placed in your file. An initial fraud alert will stay on your report for up to 90 days. An extended alert will remain on your credit report for seven years if you provide the credit bureau with an identity theft report. This report consists of a copy of the report filed with your law enforcement agency when you initially reported the theft and any documentation beyond that verifying your identity to the satisfaction of the credit bureau. This alert will enable the company to contact you if there is any attempt to establish credit in your name. There is no fee for a fraud alert. Also, request a credit report for your review.

You may also wish to establish a credit freeze (also known as a security freeze), which allows you to restrict access to your credit report. A credit freeze makes it harder for an identity thief to open a new account in your name because creditors will want to see your credit report before they extend credit. After setting the freeze, you will get a PIN or password so that only you can lift the freeze. If you want to apply for new credit, you will have to lift the credit freeze temporarily so that potential lenders can view your credit report.

The credit bureaus and other companies also offer credit monitoring, which does not prevent identity theft but attempts to alert you to suspicious activity in your account. The credit bureaus and most other providers of credit monitoring services charge a monthly fee (Credit Karma does not charge for credit monitoring).

Exhibit 7.4 provides important contact information that you can use to prevent identity theft, report identity theft, or report related criminal activity.
Exhibit 7.4 Useful Sources of Information to Protect Against Identity Theft

Figure 7.4 Full Alternative Text
Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.identitytheft.gov

To get
Information about identity theft and the tools to report identity theft.

Contact Creditors
Contact all your creditors and any creditors with which unauthorized accounts have been opened in your name. Many creditors may request a copy of the police report that you obtained from your local law enforcement agency. While contacting your credit card companies and financial institutions, take the opportunity to change all your passwords.

Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Recently, Stephanie Spratt was shocked to receive a statement indicating that her credit card had been charged to its $5,000 limit. The statement showed 18 unauthorized purchases, totaling $4,906, all made within a two-day time period. Stephanie quickly checked her wallet but her credit card was in its usual compartment.

Stephanie called customer service at the credit card company to report the unauthorized charges, close the account, and request a new card. Because the thief stole Stephanie’s credit card number, she was not liable for the unauthorized use.

Stephanie recalled a recent e-mail from a popular online store, saying that her account would be terminated if she didn’t update her credit information. A quick e-mail to the store confirmed that no such e-mail was sent. Stephanie was a victim of a phishing scam.

As best she can recall, the information Stephanie provided to the phisher was her credit card account number, her name, and her address. To be safe, Stephanie’s next step was to put an alert on her credit report. She decided to check her report in one month, and if there is fraudulent information, she will request corrections and fill out an identity theft report.
How Credit Assessment and Security Fit within Your Financial Plan
The following are the key credit assessment and security decisions that should be included in your financial plan:

Is your credit standing adequate so that you can use credit?

Is your credit and personal identity information secure?

By making informed decisions, you can ensure that you access credit only when your credit standing is adequate and prevent others from using your credit or identity information. Exhibit 7.5 shows how credit standing and security apply to Stephanie Spratt’s financial plan.

Exhibit 7.5 How Credit Standing and Security Fit within Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Plan

Figure 7.5 Full Alternative Text
Discussion Questions
How might Stephanie’s need for credit be different if she were a single mother of two children?

How might Stephanie’s need for credit be different if she were 35 years old? 50 years old?
Summary
BACKGROUND ON CREDIT. Credit, which consists of funds provided to a borrower that will be repaid in the future, has both advantages and disadvantages. An advantage is the convenience that credit provides in making day-to-day purchases without the need to carry large amounts of cash. A disadvantage is that credit can result in bankruptcy if not used properly.

CREDIT BUREAUS. A complete history of your credit transactions is maintained by credit bureaus that calculate your credit score and report this information and your credit report to interested parties.

Lenders commonly access the credit payment history provided by one or more credit bureaus when deciding whether to extend a personal loan. You can obtain a free credit report each year from each of the three credit bureaus to ensure that the report is accurate. The credit report contains potentially negative information from public records, such as bankruptcy filings. It also offers information about late payments, accounts in good standing, inquiries made about your credit history, and personal information.

IDENTITY THEFT. Identity theft, which involves the use of your personal identifying information without your permission, is one of the fastest-growing crimes in our country. An identity thief may use your personal information to obtain goods, services, or money or to create a new identity. All these actions can hurt your credit history.

Common identity theft tactics include shoulder surfing, dumpster diving, skimming, pretexting, phishing, and pharming.

PROTECTING AGAINST IDENTITY THEFT. You can protect against identity theft by shredding old financial information such as your bank and credit card statements, reviewing your accounts regularly, using online payment systems, securing your smartphone, and being careful when you shop online. Take precautions where you work, bank, and receive medical care. Requesting the elimination of your Social Security number on health care insurance cards, identity badges, and paychecks is a necessary step in safeguarding your identity.

Obtain a copy of your credit report at least once a year. Carefully review your credit report for unusual account activity and the existence of accounts of which you are not aware.

RESPONDING TO IDENTITY THEFT. Should your identity be stolen, notify the police and request a written report. Also notify the FTC, credit bureaus, credit card companies, and financial institutions.

HOW CREDIT ASSESSMENT AND SECURITY FIT WITHIN YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Access to credit can allow you to make purchases that you could not make if you had to rely on your cash and checking account. Thus, you can more easily achieve your financial plan by acquiring assets (such as a new car or a home) if you maintain a good credit standing. However, you should take steps to protect against identity theft so that you can continue to have access to credit.
Review Questions
TYPES OF CREDIT. Explain the three types of credit. Under what conditions might a consumer find each type useful?

USING CREDIT. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using credit?

CASH VERSUS CREDIT. Why should some people use cash to make purchases instead of credit?

CREDIT RIGHTS. Under what conditions does the Equal Credit Opportunity Act prohibit creditors from denying credit? If you are denied credit, do you have the right to know the reason for the denial?

IMPACT OF CREDIT REPORT. Explain how a poor credit report can affect you.

CREDIT BUREAUS. Name the three major credit bureaus. How do they score your credit rating? Will all three major credit bureaus always produce the same credit score?

CREDIT REPORT. What are the six major areas of information that may be included in your credit report?

CREDIT SCORE. What factors determine your credit score, and how are these factors weighted by FICO?

VANTAGESCORE. How does a VantageScore differ from a FICO score?

IMPROVING YOUR CREDIT SCORE. How can you improve your credit score, and how long can it take to erase a poor credit history?

REVIEWING YOUR CREDIT SCORE. How often should you review your credit report from each of the three major credit bureaus? Why is this review beneficial?

CORRECTING MISTAKES ON YOUR CREDIT REPORT. Explain how you can correct a mistake you discovered on your credit report.

FREE CREDIT REPORTS. What information can you get for free from sites such as Credit Karma?

IDENTITY THEFT. What constitutes identity theft? Is identity theft only perpetrated to acquire money, goods, or services? Can identity theft occur through legitimate access to your personal information? Explain.

IDENTITY THEFT INSURANCE. What is identity theft insurance? What items should you consider when obtaining identity theft insurance?.

IMPACT OF IDENTITY THEFT. Aside from the financial losses, what other negative impacts might a victim of identity theft encounter?

IDENTITY THEFT TACTICS. Name and explain at least three tactics used by identity thieves to obtain information.

PROTECTING AGAINST IDENTITY THEFT AT WORK. What are some safeguards you can put in place to protect against identity theft at work?

SAFEGUARDING INFORMATION. Discuss steps you can take to safeguard your personal information at home.

RESPONDING TO IDENTITY THEFT. What steps should you take if you become a victim of identity theft?

CREDIT SCORES AND AGE. Why are credit scores typically lower for younger persons?

CREDIT HISTORY. What is your credit history? How does it impact your ability to borrow money?

CREDIT SCORE AND OPEN ACCOUNTS. Explain how closing a credit card account can negatively impact your credit score.

CHECKING CREDIT SCORES. Why should you be careful about checking your credit score on one of the numerous “free” sites?

CREDIT COUNSELING. Explain the advantages and disadvantages of using a credit counseling organization.

EMV CARDS. How has EMV technology helped reduce identity theft?

SOCIAL MEDIA AND IDENTITY THEFT. What are some factors to consider when using social media with respect to identity theft?

