Chapter 6Managing Your Money

Ocusfocus/123RF

Javier lives from paycheck to paycheck. His checkbook register showed that he had a balance of $110, so he used his debit card for five transactions totaling $30, wrote a check for $20 to make the payment on his credit card, and had two automatic payments for utilities deducted from his account for a total of $50. Unfortunately, Javier had forgotten to list three debit card transactions in his check register, and instead of $110, his real balance was $35. As a result, the check to the credit card company bounced, and the automatic payments were not made. Each payee was assessed a late fee of $15 for the late payment, and the bank charged Javier an insufficient funds fee of $35 for the check and each automatic payment. Thus, Javier was assessed a total of $150 in penalties.

Part of this expensive lesson for Javier could have been avoided if he had requested overdraft protection on his account. The overdraft protection would have saved him from the late fees, although he would still have had to pay overdraft fees and possibly interest on the overdraft loan. Even though banks offer mobile apps or other ways to easily check your balance, some people don’t keep track of their balances and therefore may have insufficient funds to support their transactions. Consequently, they are charged penalty fees by their banks. This chapter describes techniques for managing your checking account. It also identifies various types of money market investments and explains how the use of cash management can lead to increased liquidity within your financial plan.

The objectives of this chapter are to
Provide background information on money management.

Describe the most popular money market investments.

Identify the risk associated with money market investments.

Explain how to manage your money market investments.

Explain how money management fits within your financial plan.
Background on Money Management
Money management describes the decisions you make over a short-term period regarding your cash inflows and outflows. It is separate from decisions about investing or borrowing funds for a long-term period (such as several years). Instead, it focuses on maintaining short-term investments to achieve both liquidity and an adequate return on your investments, as explained next.

money management
A series of decisions made over a short-term period regarding cash inflows and outflows.

Liquidity
As discussed in Chapter 1, liquidity refers to your ability to cover any short-term cash deficiencies. Recall that the personal cash flow statement determines the amount of excess or deficient funds that you have at the end of a period, such as one month from now. Money management is related to the personal cash flow statement because it helps you determine how to use excess funds or how to obtain funds if your cash inflows are insufficient. You should strive to maintain a sufficient amount of funds in liquid assets, such as a checking account or savings account, to draw on when your cash outflows exceed your cash inflows. In this way, you maintain adequate liquidity.

liquidity
Your ability to cover any cash deficiencies that you may experience.

Liquidity is necessary because there will be periods when your cash inflows are not adequate to cover your cash outflows. But there are also opportunity costs if you maintain an excessive amount of liquid funds: A portion of those funds could have been invested in other assets that could earn a higher return. In general, the more liquid an investment, the lower its return, so you forgo higher returns when maintaining a high degree of liquidity.

Using Credit Cards for Liquidity
Some individuals rely on a credit card (to be discussed in detail in Chapter 8) as a source of liquidity rather than maintaining liquid investments. Many credit cards provide temporary free financing from the time you make purchases until the date when your payment is due. Thus, a credit card can be a very useful source of funds.

However, if you have insufficient funds to pay the entire credit card balance when the bill is due, you have to pay only a portion of your balance and finance the rest of the payment. The interest rate is usually quite high, such as 20%. Maintaining liquid assets that you can easily access when you need funds allows you to avoid using credit and paying high finance charges.

Many consumers obtain a credit card to serve their liquidity needs but then end up using it in other ways. Some consumers rely on credit cards for many of their purchases. Although they may plan to pay off the credit card balance each month, they may not be able to if the amount of their purchases is large. Paying the minimum payment on the credit card bill and deferring the rest of the payment may seem painless, but the consumer is overlooking the fact that they will have to repay the debt as well as the interest later. Although credit cards can serve as an excellent source of liquidity, if they are used as a permanent source of financing it may result in credit repayment problems later.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance

Adequate Return
When you maintain short-term investments, you should strive to achieve the highest possible return. The return on your short-term investments depends on the prevailing risk-free rate and the level of risk you are willing to tolerate. Some assets that satisfy your liquidity needs may not necessarily achieve the return that you expect. For example, you could maintain a large amount of cash in your wallet or your checking account as a source of liquidity, but it would earn a zero rate of return. Other investments may provide an adequate return but are not liquid. To achieve both liquidity and an adequate return, you should consider investing in multiple money market investments, which are described next.
Money Market Investments
Common investments for short-term periods include the following money market investments:

Checking account

NOW account

Savings deposit

Certificate of deposit

Money market deposit account (MMDA)

Treasury bills

Money market fund

Asset management account

All these investments except Treasury bills and money market funds are offered by depository institutions and are insured for up to $250,000 in the event of default by the institution. In this section, we’ll examine each of these investments in turn and focus on their liquidity and typical return.

Checking Account
Individuals deposit funds in a checking account at a depository institution and access these funds by writing checks or using their debit card to pay for various products and services. A checking account is a liquid investment because you can access your funds by withdrawing funds or writing checks at any time.

Overdraft Protection
Many depository institutions offer overdraft protection, which protects customers who use their debit cards or write checks for amounts that exceed their checking account balance. The protection is essentially a short-term loan from the depository institution. For example, if you write a check for $300 but have a checking account balance of only $100, the depository institution will provide overdraft protection by making a loan of $200 to make up the difference. It will also charge you an overdraft fee. Without overdraft protection, checks written against an insufficient account balance bounce, meaning that they are not honored by the depository institution. In addition, a customer who writes a check that bounces may be charged a penalty fee by the financial institution. The cost of overdraft protection is the overdraft fee and the high interest rate charged on the loan. You can avoid the cost of overdraft protection by keeping track of all your transactions and checking your balance regularly.

overdraft protection
An arrangement that protects a customer who uses a debit card or writes a check for an amount that exceeds their checking account balance; it is a short-term loan from the depository institution where the checking account is maintained.

Stop Payment
If you write a check but believe that it was never received or deposited by the payee, you may request that the financial institution stop payment, which means that the institution will not honor the check if someone tries to cash it. In some cases, a customer may even stop payment to prevent the recipient from cashing a check. For example, if you write a check to pay for home repairs but the job is not completed, you may decide to stop payment on the check. Normally, a fee is charged for a stop payment service.

stop payment
A financial institution’s notice that it will not honor a check if someone tries to cash it; usually occurs in response to a request by the writer of the check; can also be used to stop an automatic payment from a checking account.

If you have arranged to have bills paid automatically from your account, you can also use a stop payment order to stop a one-time payment. If you want to stop all future automatic payments to a company, you can call or write to your bank to revoke authorization for automatic payments to that company. Some financial institutions have an online form that you can use to revoke authorization. Be aware that revoking authorization for all automatic payments to a company does not cancel your contract with that company. For example, if you have been paying your cable television bill with automatic payments, using a one-time stop payment order or revoking authorization does not end your contract with the cable company. You will have to contact the company directly and cancel the service.

Direct Deposit
You can set up a direct deposit system so that your paychecks go directly from your employer to your financial institution. Therefore, you will not need to deposit your paychecks. In fact, many employers now pay only through direct deposit. Direct deposit offers several advantages. Not only is it safer because there is no chance that you will lose your paycheck, but it can also help you save money in several ways. Banks often waive checking account fees if you have at least one direct deposit per month. In addition, some employers will allow you to split your pay between your checking and savings accounts. Saving can be easier if a certain amount is directly deposited into your savings account each month.
Some people find that the direct deposit system helps them save money because when they cash their paychecks they tend to spend their money immediately. When they have their paycheck sent directly to their checking account, they do not have what can seem like excess cash to spend. Furthermore, the record of their spending by check or debit card allows them to monitor how they spend their money over time.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance

Some financial institutions offer a direct deposit advance, which allows you to borrow up to a certain amount (often $500) from your next direct deposit. When the next direct deposit arrives, the bank deducts the amount of the advance plus fees before putting the money in your account. The fees are costly, so a direct deposit advance should be used only in an emergency.

Fees
Depository institutions may charge a monthly fee such as $15 per month for providing checking services unless the depositor maintains a minimum balance in the checking account or a minimum aggregate balance in other accounts at that institution or receives direct deposits. Some financial institutions charge a fee per check written instead of a monthly fee. The specific fee structure and the rules for waiving the fee vary among financial institutions, so you should compare fees before you decide where to set up your checking account.

No Interest
A disadvantage of investing funds in a checking account is that the funds do not earn any interest. For this reason, you should keep only enough funds in your checking account to cover anticipated expenses and a small excess amount in case unanticipated expenses arise.

NOW Account
Another deposit offered by depository institutions is a NOW (negotiable order of withdrawal) account. A NOW account allows you to write checks, and it also pays interest, although the interest is relatively low compared with many other bank deposits. A NOW account may have some restrictions on accessing your funds, so it is not as popular as the other money market investments mentioned here. Because of its restrictions, the NOW account will not be given any additional attention in this chapter.

NOW (negotiable order of withdrawal) account
A type of deposit offered by depository institutions that provides checking services and pays interest.

Savings Deposit
Traditional savings accounts offered by a depository institution pay interest on deposits. In addition, funds can normally be withdrawn from a savings account at any time. A savings account does not provide checking services. It is less liquid than a checking account because you cannot use the account to write checks or to make purchases with a debit card. If your checking account debit card is linked to your savings account, you can use it to withdraw cash from the savings account at an ATM. You can also easily transfer funds from a savings account to a checking account at an ATM or by using a mobile app. The interest rate offered on savings deposits varies among depository institutions. Many institutions quote their rates on their websites.

Automatic Transfer
You may want to consider setting up an automatic transfer at your bank to move funds from one account to another. For example, you could request that your financial institution automatically transfer $50 from your checking account to your savings account every two weeks. This allows you to build your savings automatically, as you do not have to initiate the transfer. However, you should only set up an automatic transfer if you are sure that you will still have sufficient funds in your checking account to cover your spending needs.

The automatic transfer not only is convenient but also can ensure that you save a portion of your income. If it is not done automatically, you might not remember to request the transfer of funds from your checking account to your savings account. In that case, your checking account would accumulate more funds, which might lead you to spend those funds. With automatic transfers from your checking account to your savings account, you will have less money available to spend.

Certificate of Deposit
As mentioned in Chapter 5, a certificate of deposit (CD) offered by a depository institution specifies a minimum amount that must be invested, a maturity date on which the deposit matures, and an annualized interest rate. Common maturity dates for CDs are one month, three months, six months, one year, three years, and five years. Some financial institutions will automatically roll over or renew CDs at the same maturity when they mature. Before the maturity date, the institution is required to send a written statement specifying when the CD will mature and details on options to renew the CD. CDs of smaller denominations (such as $5,000) are sometimes referred to as retail CDs because they are more attractive to individuals than to firms, while CDs in very large denominations such as $100,000 appeal to firms.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance
retail CDs
Certificates of deposit that have small denominations (such as $5,000).

Return
Depository institutions offer higher interest rates on CDs than on savings deposits. The higher return is compensation to you for being willing to maintain the investment until maturity. Interest rates are quoted on an annualized basis. The interest to be generated by your investment in a CD is based on the annualized interest rate and the amount of time until maturity. The interest rates offered on CDs can vary among depository institutions.

Liquidity
A penalty is imposed for early withdrawal from CDs, so these deposits are less liquid than funds deposited in a savings account. You should consider a CD only if you are certain that you will not need the funds until after it matures. You may decide to invest some of your funds in a CD and other funds in more liquid assets.

Example
A three-month (90-day) CD offers an annualized interest rate of 3% and requires a $5,000 minimum deposit. You want to determine the amount of interest you would earn if you invested $5,000 in the CD. Because the interest rate is annualized, you will receive only a fraction of the 3% rate because your investment is for a fraction of the year:

Interest Earned
=
Deposit Amount
×
Interest Rate
×
Adjustment for Investment Period
=
$
5,000
×
0.03
×
90
/
365
This process can be more easily understood by noting that the interest rate is applied for only 90 days, whereas the annual interest rate reflects 365 days. The interest rate that applies to your 90-day investment is for about one-fourth (90/365) of the year, so the applicable interest rate is:

Interest Rate
=
0.03
×
90
/
365
=
0.0074
 or 
0.74
%
The 0.74% represents the actual return on your investment.

Now the interest can be determined by simply applying this return to the deposit amount:

Interest Earned
=
Deposit Amount
×
Interest Rate
=
$
5,0
0
0
×
0.0
0
7
4
=
$
3
7
Choice among CD Maturities
CDs with longer terms to maturity typically offer higher annualized interest rates. However, CDs with longer maturities tie up your funds for a longer period of time and are therefore less liquid. Your choice of a maturity date for a CD may depend on your need for liquidity. For example, if you know that you need your funds in four months, you could invest in a three-month CD and then place the funds in a more liquid asset (such as your checking account or savings account) when the CD matures. If you do not expect to need the funds for one year, you may consider a one-year CD.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.bankrate.com/ and click on “CD Rates.”

To get
Updated interest rates offered on CDs by some depository institutions.

Money Market Deposit Account (MMDA)
A money market deposit account (MMDA) is a deposit account offered by a depository institution that requires a minimum balance to be maintained, has no maturity date, pays interest, and allows a limited number of withdrawals per month. The minimum balance and fees vary among financial institutions. For example, an account might require that a minimum balance of $2,500 be maintained over the month and charge a $15 per month fee in any month when the minimum balance falls below that level. Under federal regulations, funds cannot be withdrawn by check, debit card purchase, or electronic transfer more than six times each month, but unlimited withdrawals of cash may be made at an ATM or in person at a bank branch.

money market deposit account (MMDA)
A deposit offered by a depository institution that requires a minimum balance, has no maturity date, pays interest, and allows a limited number of withdrawals each month.
n MMDA can be ideal if you need an account to write just a few checks per month but want to earn interest on your funds in that account. Many individuals maintain a checking account to cover most of their day-to-day transactions and an MMDA to capitalize on the higher interest rate. Thus, they may keep a larger amount of funds in the MMDA and use this account to write a large check for an unexpected expense or to make a large purchase with a debit card. The MMDA is not as liquid as a checking account because it limits the number of withdrawals by check or debit card.

Treasury Bills
As mentioned in Chapter 5, Treasury securities are debt securities issued by the U.S. Treasury. When the U.S. government needs to spend more money than it has received in taxes, it borrows funds by issuing Treasury securities. Individuals can purchase Treasury securities through a brokerage firm. Treasury securities are offered with various maturities, such as four weeks, three months, six months, one year, 10 years, and 30 years. For money management purposes, individuals tend to focus on Treasury bills (T-bills), which are Treasury securities that will mature in one year or less. T-bills are available with a minimum value at maturity (called the par value) of $100 and come in denominations of multiples of $100.

Treasury securities
Debt securities issued by the U.S. Treasury.

Treasury bills (T-bills)
Treasury securities with maturities of one year or less.

Return
Treasury bills are purchased at a discount from par value. If you invest in a T-bill and hold it until maturity, you earn a capital gain, which is the difference between the par value of the T-bill at maturity and the amount you paid for the T-bill. Your return on the T-bill is the capital gain as a percentage of your initial investment.

When measuring returns on investments, you should annualize the returns so that you can compare returns on various investments with different maturities. An investment over a one-month period will likely generate a smaller dollar amount of return than a one-year investment. To compare the one-month and one-year investments, you need to determine the annualized yield (or percentage return) on each investment.

Example
An investor pays $9,700 to purchase a T-bill that has a par value of $10,000 and a one-year maturity. When the T-bill matures, she receives $10,000. The return from investing in the T-bill is as follows:

Return on T-Bill
=
$
10,000
−
$
9,700
$
9,700
=
3.09
%
For an investment that lasts three months (one-fourth of a year), multiply by four to determine the annualized return. For an investment that lasts six months (one-half of a year), multiply by two to determine the annualized return. The most precise method of annualizing a return is to multiply the return by 
365
/
𝑁
,
 where 
𝑁
 is the number of days the investment existed.

Example
An investor pays $9,850 to purchase a T-bill with a par value of $10,000 and a maturity of 182 days. The annualized return from investing in the T-bill is as follows:

Return on T-Bill
=
$
10,000
−
$
9,850
$
9,850
×
365
182
=
3.05
%
Secondary Market
There is a secondary market for T-bills where they can be sold before their maturity with the help of a brokerage firm. This secondary market also allows individuals to purchase T-bills that were previously owned by someone else. However, this secondary market mostly focuses on T-bills with very large denominations, such as $100,000, that are held by firms and therefore does not serve most individual investors. T-bills that are held by individuals are typically held until maturity so are not liquid. The return on a T-bill is usually slightly lower than the return on a CD with the same maturity.

secondary market
A market where existing securities such as Treasury bills can be purchased or sold.
Quotations
The prices of various T-bills and the returns they offer for holding them until maturity are quoted in financial newspapers and on financial websites.

Money Market Funds (MMFs)
Money market funds (MMFs) pool money from individuals to invest in securities that have a short-term maturity, typically one year or less. A typical MMF might have thousands of small investors, so even though each personal investment is relatively small, its total assets may be worth $1 billion or more. Thus, one benefit of an MMF is that it allows individuals to invest in some types of securities that they could not afford on their own. The average time remaining to maturity of debt securities held in an MMF is typically less than 90 days.

money market funds (MMFs)
Accounts that pool money from individuals and invest in securities that have a short-term maturity, typically one year or less.

Types of Investments by MMFs
Many MMFs invest in short-term Treasury securities or wholesale CDs (in denominations of $100,000 or more). Investors can invest in MMFs by sending a check for the amount they wish to have invested for them. Some MMFs invest mainly in commercial paper, which consists of short-term debt securities issued by large corporations. Commercial paper typically generates a slightly higher interest rate than T-bills. Money market funds are not insured, but most of them invest in safe investments and have a very low risk of default.

commercial paper
Short-term debt securities issued by large corporations that typically offer a slightly higher return than Treasury bills.

Liquidity of MMFs
MMFs offer some liquidity in that individuals can make a limited number of debit card purchases or write a limited number of checks on their accounts each month. Often the transactions must exceed a minimum amount (such as $250). Individuals may use the checking account associated with an MMF to cover large expenditures, while maintaining a regular checking account to cover smaller purchases. Many individuals invest in an MMF so that they can earn interest until the money is needed. Some MMFs are linked with other accounts so that the money can earn interest until it is transferred to another account. For example, many brokerage accounts allow investors to place any unused funds in an MMF until the funds are used to purchase stock.

Money Market Fund Quotations
Financial websites and newspapers such as the Wall Street Journal commonly publish the yields provided by numerous money market funds. An example of the typical information provided for one money market fund is shown in Exhibit 6.1. The first column lists the name of the MMF, the second column displays the average maturity (in days) of the investments of that fund, the third column shows the annualized yield generated by the fund over a recent period, and the fourth column describes the size of the fund’s total assets (measured in millions of dollars). The Star Fund (Exhibit 6.1) invests in government securities that have a short term remaining until maturity. This fund’s investments have an average time to maturity of 43 days. It generated an annual yield of 3.28% for its investors over the last seven days and the fund presently manages $496 million in assets.

Exhibit 6.1 Weekly Money Market Fund Yields

Figure 6.1 Full Alternative Text
Asset Management Account
An asset management account combines deposit accounts with a brokerage account that is used to buy or sell stocks. The advantage of an asset management account is that it provides a single consolidated statement showing the ending balances and activity of all the accounts. Asset management accounts are available at some depository institutions and brokerage services. The financial institutions that offer these accounts require that the sum of all the accounts in the asset management account exceed some minimum amount, such as $15,000. A special type of asset management account is the sweep account, which sweeps any unused balance in the brokerage account into a money market investment at the end of each business day. The unused balance earns interest and remains available for writing checks. There is usually a monthly fee for an asset management account unless the balance exceeds a certain amount such as $100,000.

asset management account
An account that combines deposit accounts with a brokerage account and provides a single consolidated statement
sweep account
An asset management account that sweeps any unused balance in the brokerage account into a money market investment at the end of each business day.

Comparison of Money Market Investments
The various types of money market investments are compared in Exhibit 6.2. Notice that money market investments that offer a higher return tend to have less liquidity.

Exhibit 6.2 Comparison of Money Market Investments

Figure 6.2 Full Alternative Text
The relationship between the returns and the liquidity of money market investments is illustrated graphically in Exhibit 6.3. Checking accounts offer the most liquidity but provide no return. At the other extreme, a CD provides the highest return but has less liquidity than the other money market instruments.

Exhibit 6.3 Comparison of the Liquidity and Returns of Money Market Instruments

Figure 6.3 Full Alternative Text
Risk of Money Market Investments
Before you consider investing short-term funds in various money market instruments, consider your exposure to risk, or the uncertainty surrounding the potential return. Money market investments are vulnerable to three types of risk: (1) credit risk, (2) interest rate risk, and (3) liquidity risk.

Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.bankrate.com/calculators.aspx

To get
Estimates of future savings that you will accumulate over time from a CD or savings account at different interest rates.

Credit Risk
When you invest in money market securities, you may be exposed to credit risk (also referred to as default risk), which is the risk that the borrower will not repay on a timely basis. The borrower may make late payments or even default on the credit. In that event, you will receive only a portion (or none) of the money you invested. Treasury securities are backed by the federal government. Your deposits in savings accounts, CDs, and MMDAs at depository institutions are insured against default, up to a deposit level of $250,000.

credit risk
The risk that a borrower may not repay on a timely basis.

default risk
The risk that a borrower may not repay on a timely basis.

Some money market funds hold securities such as commercial paper that could default. They normally attempt to diversify to minimize their default risk. However, the return that they provide to investors could be adversely affected in a particular period if a few of their large holdings of securities defaulted. Thus, you need to assess this risk before you invest in money market securities.

Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that the value of an investment could decline as a result of a change in interest rates. In particular, the values of Treasury securities with long-term maturities (called Treasury bonds) can decline when market interest rates rise over time (as is discussed in detail in Chapter 16). However, money market investments have very little exposure to interest rate risk. Furthermore, investors can completely avoid their exposure to interest rate risk by investing in debt securities with maturities that fit the time frame in which they will need funds. If you need funds in three months, you should consider an investment that has a maturity of three months, so that you do not have to worry about changes in interest rates.

interest rate risk
The risk that the value of an investment could decline as a result of a change in interest rates.

Liquidity Risk
Recall that liquidity represents your ability to cover any short-term cash deficiencies. To be liquid, an investment should be easily converted to cash. Liquidity risk is the potential loss that could occur as a result of converting an investment to cash. For example, a retail CD has liquidity risk because it cannot be sold in the secondary market. You would incur a penalty if you tried to redeem it before maturity at the financial institution where you invested in the CD.

liquidity risk
The potential loss that could occur as a result of converting an investment into cash.

Impact of Expected Economic Conditions on Liquidity Needs
When economic conditions weaken, it can create some liquidity problems, as shown in Exhibit 6.4. For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, some individuals lost their jobs. Other individuals who kept their jobs did not work as much as expected and therefore earned less income than they had anticipated. Many retired individuals relied on their investments for income, but the performance of some of those investments was initially poor, which resulted in lower income than expected. As a result, their cash inflows were not always large enough to cover their cash outflows.
Exhibit 6.4 Impact of Economic Conditions on Liquidity Needs

Figure 6.4 Full Alternative Text
ECONOMIC IMPACT

If you suspect that economic conditions may weaken and may result in lower income, you may want to maintain a greater degree of liquidity. You could allocate more funds to liquid money market securities and less to other types of investments. In this way, if economic conditions do weaken and reduce your cash inflows, you can rely on your money market securities as a source of liquidity
Managing Your Money Market Investments
In general, your money management should be guided by the following steps:

Anticipate your upcoming bills and ensure that you have sufficient funds in your checking account.

Estimate the additional funds that you might need soon, and consider investing them in an investment that offers sufficient liquidity (such as an MMF). You may even keep a little extra in reserve here for unanticipated expenses.

Use the remaining funds in a manner that will earn you a higher return, within your level of risk tolerance.

The optimal allocation for you will likely be different from the optimal allocation for another individual, even if your cash inflows are the same. If your future cash inflows will be far short of upcoming expenses, you will need to keep a relatively large proportion of funds in your checking account. Another person who has sufficient cash inflows to cover expenses will not need as much liquidity. The difference is illustrated in Exhibit 6.5. Even though the two individuals have the same level of cash inflows, one person must maintain more liquidity than the other.

Figure 6.5 Full Alternative Text
Financial Planning ONLINE
Go to
www.fdic.gov and is the internal search engine on that web site to search for “deposit insurance.”

To get
Information about the types of deposits that are insured.

Your decision on how to invest your short-term funds (after determining how much money to maintain in your checking account) should account for your willingness to tolerate risk. If you want to minimize all forms of risk, you may simply consider investing all your funds in an MMF that always focuses on Treasury securities maturing within a month or less. However, you will likely improve your yield if you are willing to accept some degree of risk.

For example, if you know that you will not need your funds for at least six months and do not expect interest rates to rise substantially over that period, you might consider investing your funds in a six-month retail CD. A compromise would be to invest a portion of your short-term funds in the six-month retail CD and the remaining funds in an MMF that focuses on Treasury securities. The CD offers you a higher expected return (although less liquidity), while the MMF offers you liquidity in case you need funds immediately.

In general, the potential return on all money market investments is lower than the expected return on some investments such as stocks. However, money market investments have a specific purpose. They create liquidity so that you have easy access to funds. Stocks do not provide the same degree of liquidity.

PSYCHOLOGY of Personal Finance
Example

Maridav/Shutterstock

Stephanie Spratt has $2,000 available to allocate to money market investments. She knows that she will need $400 to cover several small bills in the next week and may also need $600 in a month or so to pay for repairs on her car engine. She does not expect to need the other funds for at least one month. Her financial institution offers the following annualized yields on various money market instruments:

 	Annualized Yield (%)
Checking account	0
Savings deposit	1.2
MMDA ($2,500 minimum balance)	2.0
MMF ($300 minimum balance)	1.5
One-month CD	5.0
Six-month CD	5.4
One-year CD	5.5
Stephanie’s existing checking account has a balance close to zero. She also has an MMF with a balance of $300, which she must maintain to meet the minimum balance. She will first focus on meeting her liquidity needs and then decide how to invest the remaining funds that are not needed to cover possible expenses. She decides to allocate $400 to her checking account so that she can make several payments to cover her upcoming bills. It is not worthwhile to invest these funds elsewhere as she will need the funds soon, and the checking account is the only investment that will allow her to make several small payments.

She knows that she might soon need another $600 for car repairs, but wants to earn as high a return as possible until she needs the money. She immediately eliminates the MMDA from consideration because it would require a minimum balance of $2,500. She decides to invest the $600 in her MMF. She can write a check from this account to cover the car repairs; meanwhile, the funds invested in the MMF will earn 1.5% interest on an annualized basis.

Stephanie now has $1,000 remaining to allocate and anticipates that she will not need the money for at least one month. She does not consider investing the $1,000 in a six-month CD or one-year CD, even though they offer slightly higher interest rates than the one-month CD, because she may need the funds in one month. She decides to invest the $1,000 in a one-month CD because that alternative provides the best guaranteed return over a one-month period.
Stephanie recognizes that other types of investments such as stocks can offer higher returns but their values can also decline. She does not consider using any of her $2,000 available for stocks because she expects that she will need this money soon. Although she could sell stocks at any time, she may have to accept a loss on her investment when selling the stock in some periods. She wants to focus on more liquid alternatives such as money market investments, so that she will have enough funds to pay her bills in the future.
How Money Management Fits within Your Financial Plan
The following are the key money management decisions that you should include in your financial plan:

How can you ensure that you can pay your anticipated bills on time?

How can you maintain adequate liquidity in case you incur unanticipated expenses?

How should you invest any remaining funds among money market investments?

By making proper decisions, you can minimize your use of credit and maximize the return on your liquid assets. As an example, Exhibit 6.6 shows how money market decisions apply to Stephanie Spratt’s financial plan.

Exhibit 6.6 How Money Management Fits within Stephanie Spratt’s Financial Plan

Figure 6.6 Full Alternative Text
Discussion Questions
How would Stephanie’s money management decisions be different if she were a single mother of two children
How would Stephanie’s money management decisions be affected if she were 35 years old? If she were 50 years old?
Summary
MONEY MANAGEMENT. Money management involves the selection of short-term investments that satisfy your liquidity needs and also provide you with an adequate return on your investment. Your main priority should be on ensuring adequate liquidity to cover both anticipated and unanticipated expenses each month. Short-term investments that offer relatively high returns tend to have less liquidity.

POPULAR MONEY MARKET INVESTMENTS. Popular short-term investments considered for money management include checking accounts, savings accounts, CDs, MMDAs, Treasury bills, money market funds, and asset management accounts. Checking accounts offer the most liquidity. CDs and T-bills offer the highest return.

RISK OF MONEY MARKET INVESTMENTS. The risks related to money market investments are credit (default) risk, interest rate risk, and liquidity risk. The money market investments offered by depository institutions are insured and insulate you from the risk that the institution could default. Investments in T-bills have no default risk because they are backed by the federal government. Money market securities tend to have a low level of interest rate risk because they have short-term maturities. They also have relatively low liquidity risk because of the short-term maturities of their assets.

MANAGING YOUR MONEY MARKET INVESTMENTS. When managing your money market securities, you should first anticipate your expenses in the next month and maintain enough funds in your checking account to cover those expenses. In addition, estimate the potential level of unanticipated expenses (such as possible car repairs) and maintain enough funds in a short-term investment such as a money market fund to cover these expenses. Finally, invest the remaining funds to earn the highest return within your level of risk tolerance.

HOW MONEY MANAGEMENT FITS WITHIN YOUR FINANCIAL PLAN. Money management decisions can ensure that you have access to funds to pay your anticipated bills on time and that you maintain adequate liquidity in case you incur unanticipated expenses.
Review Questions
MONEY MANAGEMENT. Define money management. How does it differ from long-term investment or long-term borrowing decisions?

LIQUIDITY. What is liquidity? How is your personal cash flow statement used to help manage your liquidity? How does money management relate to the cash flow statement?

CASH FLOW DEFICIENCY. Name some ways an individual might handle a cash flow deficiency. Which way would be preferable? Why?

CREDIT CARDS AND LIQUIDITY. What is the risk of using credit cards as a source of liquidity?

LIQUID INVESTMENTS. What two factors affect the return on short-term investments? What investments should you consider to achieve liquidity and an adequate return?

CHECKING ACCOUNTS. Why do individuals use checking accounts? What is the disadvantage of having funds in a checking account? Explain overdraft protection and stop payment orders. Are all bank fee structures the same?

DIRECT DEPOSIT. What are the advantages of using direct deposit?

SAVINGS ACCOUNT. What is a savings account? How is it different from a checking account?

AUTOMATIC TRANSFERS. How can automatic transfers help you save money?

CDS. What terms does a financial institution specify for certificates of deposit? Why are rates on CDs higher than those on savings accounts? What factor would most affect your choice of maturity date on a CD?

MMDAS. When might a depositor use an MMDA?

TREASURY SECURITIES. What are Treasury securities? What is a T-bill? How is it denominated? How do you earn a return on a T-bill? How is the return calculated?

MMFS. What are money market funds (MMFs)? What types of securities do they invest in? What is commercial paper? Are MMFs risky investments? Are MMFs liquid?

ASSET MANAGEMENT ACCOUNT. What is an asset management account? Discuss the advantages of such an account as well as its requirements.

LIQUIDITY OF MONEY MARKET INVESTMENTS. Compare the return and liquidity of the various money market investments. Give specific examples.

RISK OF MONEY MARKET INVESTMENTS. What are the three types of risk that affect money market investments?

ALLOCATION OF MONEY MARKET INVESTMENTS. What steps should you take to determine the best allocation of your money market investments? What factors should you consider in determining your allocation?

LIQUIDITY DURING A WEAK ECONOMY. Why is it important to have sufficient liquidity during a weak economy?

DISADVANTAGE OF HIGH LIQUIDITY. What is a disadvantage of maintaining a very high level of liquidity?

ECONOMIC IMPACT ON LIQUIDITY NEEDS. Assume that your monthly expenses will not change over the next three years, but you expect that the economy will be much weaker in about a year. Explain why you may need more liquidity even if your expenses do not change.

COST OF MAINTAINING MORE LIQUIDITY. Explain why maintaining more liquidity during a weak economy is costly.

DEBIT CARDS. How does a debit card transaction differ from writing a check?

OVERDRAFT PROTECTION. How will overdraft protection affect bounced checks? Should you take advantage of this feature if your bank offers overdraft protection?

RISK TOLERANCE. How does your tolerance for risk impact money management?

STOCKS AND LIQUIDITY. Explain why you should not invest in the stock market if you expect to need the funds soon. Are stocks liquid?

LIQUIDITY RISK. How does liquidity risk affect money management?

LIQUIDITY NEEDS AND ECONOMIC UNCERTAINTY. How did the COVID-19 pandemic impact liquidity needs?


