The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 1

The Sampsons is a continuing case that occurs at the end of every chapter. You will help the Sampsons develop their financial plan using the key concepts presented in each chapter.

Dave and Sharon Sampson are 30 years old and have two children, who are five and six years old. Since marrying seven years ago, the Sampsons have relied on Dave’s salary, which is currently $50,000 per year. Sharon recently obtained a part-time job that pays an annual salary of $15,000. Now that Sharon is also earning income, they hope to use her income to accumulate savings for their children’s college education in the distant future and also to buy a new car for Sharon, because her existing car is very old and constantly needs repairs.

Help the Sampsons prioritize their financial goals. Specifically, assess whether their primary goal at this point should be saving for their children’s college education in the future versus buying a new car for Sharon.

The Sampsons hope that $1,000 per month of Sharon’s salary can be used to boost their savings. How can they monitor this goal over time to ensure that the money is used in this manner?



The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 2

""

The Sampsons realize that the first step toward achieving their financial goals is to create a budget capturing their monthly cash inflows and outflows. Dave and Sharon’s combined disposable (after-tax) income is now about $5,000 per month.

Reviewing their bank statement from last month, Dave and Sharon identify the following monthly household payments:

$1,100 for home expenses (including the mortgage payment, home insurance, and property taxes)

$100 for Internet

$200 for electricity and water

$200 for cellular expenses

$800 for groceries

$200 for health care expenses

The Sampsons also review several credit card bills to estimate their other typical monthly expenses:

About $300 for clothing

About $400 for car expenses (insurance, maintenance, and gas)

About $200 for school expenses

About $900 for recreation and programs for the children

To determine their net worth, the Sampsons also assess their assets and liabilities, which include the following:

$2,000 in their checking account

Home valued at $150,000

Furniture worth about $3,000

Sharon’s car, which needs to be replaced soon, is worth about $1,000; Dave’s car is worth approximately $8,000

They owe $130,000 on their home mortgage


Using the information in the case, prepare a personal cash flow statement for the Sampsons.

Personal Cash Flow Statement
Cash Inflows	This Month
Disposable income	 
Total Cash Inflows	 
 	 
Cash Outflows	 
Mortgage, home insurance, and property taxes	 
Internet	 
Electricity and water	 
Cellular	 
Groceries	 
Health care insurance and expenses	 
Clothing	 
Car expenses (insurance, maintenance, and gas)	 
School expenses	 
Recreation	 
Credit card minimum payments	 
Other	 
Total Cash Outflows	 
Net Cash Flows	 
The Sampsons hope to have net cash flows of $1,000 per month so that they can add $1,000 per month to their savings. Based on their personal cash flow statement for last month, were the Sampsons able to meet their goal of saving $1,000? If not, how do you recommend that they revise their personal cash flow statement to achieve their savings goal? Is there any particular cash outflow that seems unusually large that could be reduced?

Prepare a personal balance sheet for the Sampsons.

Personal Balance Sheet
Liquid Assets	 
Cash	 
Checking account	 
Savings account	 
Total liquid assets	 
Household Assets	 
Home	 
Car	 
Furniture	 
Total household assets	 
 	 
Investment Assets	 
Stocks	 
Bonds	 
Mutual funds	 
Total investment assets	 
 	 
Total Assets	 
Liabilities and Net Worth	 
Current Liabilities	 
Loans	 
Credit card balance	 
Total current liabilities	 
Long-Term Liabilities	 
Mortgage	 
Car loan	 
Total long-term liabilities	 
Total Liabilities	 
Net Worth	 
What is the Sampsons’ net worth? Based on the personal cash flow statement that you prepared in Question 1, do you expect that their net worth will increase or decrease in the future? Why?

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 3

""

Dave and Sharon Sampson recently established a plan to save $300 per month (or $3,600 per year) for their children’s education. Their oldest child is six years old and will begin college in 12 years. They will invest the $300 in a savings account that they expect will earn interest of about 2% per year over the next 12 years. The Sampsons wonder how much additional money they would accumulate if they could earn 5% per year on the savings account instead of 2%. They also wonder how their savings would accumulate if they could save $400 per month (or $4,800 per year) instead of $300 per month.

Help the Sampsons determine how much they will have for the children’s education by calculating how much $3,600 in annual savings will accumulate to if they earn interest of (a) 2% and (b) 5%. Next, determine how much $4,800 in annual savings will accumulate to if they earn interest of (a) 2% and (b) 5%.

Savings Accumulated over the Next 12 Years
(based on plan to save $3,600 per year at 2% or 5%)
Amount Saved per Year	$3,600	$3,600
Interest Rate	2%	5%
Years	12	12
Future Value of Savings	 	 
Savings Accumulated over the Next 12 Years
(based on plan to save $4,800 per year at 2% or 5%)
Amount Saved per Year	$4,800	$4,800
Interest Rate	2%	5%
Years	12	12
Future Value of Savings	 	 
What is the impact of the higher interest rate of 5% (instead of 2%) on the Sampsons’ accumulated savings?

What is the impact of the higher savings of $4,800 (instead of $3,600) on their accumulated savings?

If the Sampsons set a goal to save $70,000 for their children’s college education in 12 years, how would you determine the yearly savings necessary to achieve this goal? How much would they have to save by the end of each year to achieve this goal, assuming a 5% annual interest rate?

Calculator: Savings Needed Each Year
Future Value	$70,000
Interest Rate	5%
Years	12
Savings Needed Each Year	 

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 4

""

Dave and Sharon Sampson want to determine their taxes for this year. Their combined income will be $65,000 for the year. They did not make any individual retirement account (IRA) contributions. The Sampsons are filing jointly.

Help the Sampsons estimate their Federal Income Contributions Act (FICA) tax, which consists of Social Security and Medicare taxes.

Gross Income                

FICA Tax Rate
×
                 %

FICA Tax                

The Sampsons will use the standard deduction of $27,700 rather than itemize their deductions. Create and fill out a worksheet with the following categories to help the Sampsons estimate their taxable income.

Gross Income	$                
Individual Retirement Account (IRA) Contribution	$                
Adjusted Gross Income	$                
Standard Deduction	$                
Taxable Income	$                
What is the Sampsons’ marginal tax rate?

Help the Sampsons determine their personal income tax by accounting for the child tax credits. The tax credit is $2,000 for each of their two children.

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 5
""

""

Recall that the Sampsons would like to save a total of $1,000 per month for a down payment on a new car that they will purchase for Sharon within a year. They also hope to save money each month for their children’s college education, which begins 12 years from now. They notice that their local bank offers the certificate of deposit (CD) rates listed in the following table; they now need to determine if they should invest in CDs, and if so, which CDs will best suit their savings goals.

Maturity	Annualized Interest Rate (%)
1 month	5.0
3 months	5.2
6 months	5.0
1 year	5.0
3 years	4.8
5 years	4.6
7 years	4.6
10 years	 
Advise the Sampsons on the maturity to select if they decide to invest their savings in a CD for a down payment on a car. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the maturity that you recommend the Sampsons use for this purpose.

Advise the Sampsons on the maturity to select if they decide to invest their savings in CDs for their children’s education. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the maturity that you recommend the Sampsons use for this purpose.

If you thought that interest rates were going to rise in the next few months, how might this affect the advice that you give the Sampsons about investing in CDs with short-term versus long-term maturities?

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 6

""

The Sampsons have begun to invest in bank CDs to save for a down payment on a car and their children’s college education. But they are now concerned about potential repair expenses for Sharon’s car. They would like to have sufficient liquidity so that if they need to buy her a new car immediately, they could afford a down payment without being forced to cash in CDs early (because they would be charged a penalty). How might they revise their CD investing strategy to increase their liquidity?

Advise the Sampsons on money market investments they should consider to provide them with adequate liquidity.

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 7

Shutterstock

The Sampsons’ credit card has a credit limit of $10,000. They have just received a letter from the credit card company offering to increase their credit limit to $20,000. The Sampsons have read several articles on identity theft and are concerned with protecting themselves from this fast-growing crime. They currently receive their mail in a curbside mailbox, and they dispose of all junk mail in the trash.

Should the Sampsons accept the increase in the limit on their credit card, even if they do not anticipate using it?

Advise the Sampsons on steps that they can take to reduce their exposure to identity theft.

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 8

Shutterstock

This month, the Sampsons increased their savings by $3,000 because they paid most of their expenses with a credit card. However, now their credit card has a balance of about $2,000. They will likely earn about 2% on the savings. Meanwhile, their credit card company will charge them 18% interest on the credit card balance.

Advise the Sampsons on whether they should continue making minimum payments on their credit card or use money from their savings to pay off the credit balance.

The Sampsons are worried that by using savings to eliminate their credit card debt, they will reduce their assets and their net worth. Explain to the Sampsons how using savings to eliminate credit card debt affects their total assets, total liabilities, and net worth, and how it will improve their net cash flows over time.

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 9
A photograph shows a happy family of four people sitting. The family has a man, a woman, and two children, a boy and a girl.

Shutterstock

Recall from Chapter 8 that the Sampsons had savings of $3,000 and credit card debt of $2,000. Assume that they have now paid off their credit card debt and have also accumulated total savings of $5,000 that they will use as a down payment on a new car. Sharon’s new car is priced at $25,000 plus 5% sales tax. She will receive a $1,000 trade-in credit on her existing car and will make a $5,000 down payment on the new car. The Sampsons would like to allocate a maximum of $500 per month to the loan payments on Sharon’s new car. The annual interest rate on a car loan is currently 7%. They would prefer to have a relatively short loan maturity, but cannot afford a monthly payment higher than $500.

    Advise the Sampsons on possible loan maturities. Access an online loan payment calculator. Input information to determine the possible monthly car payments for a three-year (36-month) payment period, a four-year (48-month) period, and a five-year (60-month) period. Enter the results in the following table.
      	Three-Year (36-month) Period 	Four-Year (48-month) Period 	Five-Year (60-month) Period
    Interest rate 	7% 	7% 	7%
    Monthly payment 	  	  	 
    Total finance payments 	  	  	 
    Total payments including the down payment and the trade-in 	  	  	 

    What are the trade-offs among the three alternative loan maturities?

    Based on the information on finance payments that you retrieved from the loan payment website, advise the Sampsons on the best loan maturity for their needs.

    The Sampsons hope to have net cash flows of about $1,000 before considering their payment on a new car loan, but the main reason the Sampsons do not want a car payment of more than $500 is that they also want to save for their children’s college education. Offer your opinion on whether they should use some of their savings for their children’s college education to increase the car loan payment and therefore pay off the car loan more quickly.
	
	The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 10
A photograph shows a happy family of four people sitting. The family has a man, a woman, and two children, a boy and a girl.

Shutterstock

When the Sampsons purchased a home, they obtained a 30-year mortgage with a fixed interest rate of 6%. Their monthly mortgage payment (excluding property taxes and insurance) is about $780 per month. The Sampsons still owe about $130,000 on their existing mortgage. Today, they could obtain a 30-year $130,000 mortgage with an interest rate of 5%. Dave and Sharon want to determine how much they could lower their monthly payments by refinancing. If they refinance their home, they would incur transaction fees of $3,500 after considering any tax effects. The Sampsons take the standard deduction when calculating their personal income taxes, so their interest payments on their mortgage are not tax deductible.

    Use a website or a financial calculator to determine the monthly mortgage payment (excluding property taxes and insurance) on a $130,000 mortgage if the Sampsons obtain a new 30-year mortgage at the 5% interest rate.
    Mortgage loan 	$130,000
    Interest rate 	5%
    Years 	30
    Monthly mortgage payment 	 

    The Sampsons expect that they will not move for at least three years. Advise the Sampsons on whether they should refinance their mortgage by comparing the savings of refinancing with the costs.
    Current mortgage payment 	$780
    Mortgage payment at 5% 	 
    Monthly savings 	 
    Annual savings 	 
    Years in house after refinancing 	3
    Total savings 	 

    Why is the Sampsons’ potential benefit from refinancing their mortgage influenced by the number of years that they remain in the home after the refinancing?
	
	
The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 11

Shutterstock

As the next step in reviewing their finances, the Sampsons are assessing their insurance needs related to their vehicles and home. They indicated the amount of money they spend on insurance on their personal balance sheet in Chapter 2.

They currently have auto insurance on their two cars. Each insurance policy has a $1,000 deductible and specifies limits of 100/200/20 ($100,000 per person injured in an accident, $200,000 for all people combined, and $20,000 to cover other damage to the car or other property). Dave and Sharon live in a no-fault state.

Their homeowner’s insurance covers the market value of their home and has a deductible of $10,000. Their policy does not cover floods, which periodically occur in their area. Their house has never been flooded, though, so Dave and Sharon are not concerned.

Advise the Sampsons regarding their car insurance. Do they have enough insurance? Do they have too much insurance? How might they be able to reduce their premium?

Consider the Sampsons’ homeowner’s insurance. Do they have enough insurance? Do they have too much insurance? Should they increase their deductible?

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 12

Shutterstock

Dave and Sharon Sampson are assessing the amount of health insurance and disability insurance they have.

The Sampsons’ health insurance is provided by a health maintenance organization (HMO). Dave and Sharon have recently heard about preferred provider organizations (PPOs) and are wondering whether they should switch to a PPO. The health care plan provided by Dave’s employer allows them to use either an HMO or a PPO, but they would have to pay higher premiums for a PPO. Upon hearing that PPOs are more expensive than HMOs, Dave and Sharon are hesitant to switch, but they have not yet made up their minds. Dave and Sharon are both happy with their primary care physician and any specialists they need to consult under their HMO plan.

Dave and Sharon currently do not have disability insurance because they do not believe that they are at risk of becoming disabled. Dave and Sharon typically have monthly expenses of at least $4,000, none of which are work-related.

The Sampsons have also recently heard about long-term care insurance and are wondering whether they should purchase this type of insurance.

Make suggestions to the Sampsons regarding their health insurance. Do you think they should switch from the HMO to a PPO? Why or why not?

Do you think the Sampsons should purchase disability insurance? Why or why not?

Should the Sampsons purchase long-term care insurance? Why or why not?

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 12

Shutterstock

Dave and Sharon Sampson are assessing the amount of health insurance and disability insurance they have.

The Sampsons’ health insurance is provided by a health maintenance organization (HMO). Dave and Sharon have recently heard about preferred provider organizations (PPOs) and are wondering whether they should switch to a PPO. The health care plan provided by Dave’s employer allows them to use either an HMO or a PPO, but they would have to pay higher premiums for a PPO. Upon hearing that PPOs are more expensive than HMOs, Dave and Sharon are hesitant to switch, but they have not yet made up their minds. Dave and Sharon are both happy with their primary care physician and any specialists they need to consult under their HMO plan.

Dave and Sharon currently do not have disability insurance because they do not believe that they are at risk of becoming disabled. Dave and Sharon typically have monthly expenses of at least $4,000, none of which are work-related.

The Sampsons have also recently heard about long-term care insurance and are wondering whether they should purchase this type of insurance.

Make suggestions to the Sampsons regarding their health insurance. Do you think they should switch from the HMO to a PPO? Why or why not?

Do you think the Sampsons should purchase disability insurance? Why or why not?

Should the Sampsons purchase long-term care insurance? Why or why not?

The Sampsons—A Continuing Case: Chapter 13

Shutterstock

The Sampsons want a life insurance policy that will provide for the family in the event of Dave’s death because he is the major breadwinner. Specifically, they want life insurance benefits that could provide $40,000 per year for the next 15 years in the event of Dave’s death. Dave also wants to add $300,000 of insurance coverage to provide support for Sharon through her retirement years because they have not saved money for retirement.

Determine the present value of the insurance benefits that could provide $40,000 per year over the next 15 years for the Sampson family. Assume that the insurance payment could be invested to earn 3% interest over time.

Annual Amount	$40,000
Number of Years	15
Annual Interest Rate	3%
Present Value	$
Considering the insurance benefits needed to provide $40,000 per year over the next 15 years, plus the additional $300,000 of insurance coverage, what amount of insurance coverage is needed?

Dave Sampson is a social smoker. Because he only smokes occasionally, he would like to omit this information from his life insurance application. Advise Dave on this course of action.