CHAPTER 11
Cash Flows and Capital Budgeting

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

Explain why incremental after-tax free cash flows are relevant in evaluating a project and calculate them for a project.
Discuss the five general rules for incremental after-tax free cash flow calculations and explain why cash flows stated in nominal (real) dollars should be discounted using a nominal (real) discount rate.
Describe how distinguishing between variable and fixed costs can be useful in forecasting operating expenses.
Explain the concept of equivalent annual cost and use it to compare projects with unequal lives, decide when to replace an existing asset, and calculate the opportunity cost of using an existing asset.
Determine the appropriate time to harvest an asset.
On November 24, 2020, news outlets reported rumors that Salesforce, a large company specializing in cloud-based customer relationship management (CRM) services and business apps, was in negotiations to buy Slack Technologies Inc., the developers of the channel-based Slack messaging system. Investors in the stock market appeared to be skeptical that the acquisition was good for Salesforce. By Tuesday, December 1, the company’s stock price had declined from around $261 to $240 per share. After the market closed on Tuesday, the managers of Salesforce issued a press release confirming that they had agreed to pay an estimated $27.7 billion in cash and stock for Slack Technologies Inc. By the end of the following day, Salesforce’s stock price had dropped again to $221, a decline of just over 15 percent since rumors of the deal surfaced.

The decrease in the price of Salesforce stock suggests that investors thought that the company was overpaying for the acquisition. The decline in the stock price represented an estimated $36.6 billion decrease [($221 − $261) × 915 million shares outstanding = −$36.6 billion] in the overall value of Salesforce’s shares. In contrast, over the same time period, Slack Technologies Inc.’s stock price increased more than 40 percent, while the return on the S&P stock market index was essentially unchanged.

In the December 1 press release announcing the acquisition, Salesforce’s CEO Marc Benioff said “This is a match made in heaven. Together, Salesforce and Slack will shape the future of enterprise software and transform the way everyone works in the all-digital, work-from-anywhere world.” However, observers questioned the deal, with one analyst suggesting that it was costly, unnecessary, and risky given the dominance of Microsoft’s competing Teams platform.

When the managers of Salesforce announced their plans to acquire Slack, they were announcing a $27.7 billion investment. This investment was viewed by stock market investors from the same perspective as any capital project that a firm might pursue. Investors evaluated whether the net present value (NPV) of the cash flows from the acquisition would be positive or negative. The model used by financial analysts to estimate this NPV is the same one you saw in Chapter 10. The decrease in the value of Salesforce’s stock from the first rumor of the deal through confirmation by Salesforce’s management reflected investors’ estimates of the NPV of the decision to purchase Slack.

In Chapter 10 we stressed understanding the NPV concept and other project valuation models, as well as the mechanics of discounting project cash flows. This chapter focuses on what project cash flows are discounted and how they are calculated and used in practice. The topics covered in this chapter are central to the goal of value creation. It is necessary to understand them in order to determine which capital projects have positive NPVs and which projects have negative NPVs. Only if you can do this will you be able to choose projects that create value.

Chapter Preview
In Chapter 10 we saw that capital budgeting involves comparing the benefits and costs associated with a project to determine whether the project creates value for stockholders. These benefits and costs are reflected in the cash flows that the project is expected to produce. The NPV is a dollar measure of the amount by which the present value of the benefits exceeds the present value of the costs. Chapters 11 through 13 discuss how analysts actually apply the capital budgeting concepts introduced in Chapter 10. This chapter and Chapter 12 focus on cash flows, while Chapter 13 covers concepts related to the discount rate.

We begin this chapter with a discussion of how to calculate the cash flows used to compute the NPV of a project. We then present five rules to follow when you calculate cash flows. We also address some concepts that will help you better understand cash flow calculations.

Next, we discuss how analysts actually forecast a project’s cash flows. Since the cash flows generated by a project will almost certainly differ from the forecasts, it is important to have a framework that helps minimize errors and ensures that forecasts are internally consistent. We discuss such a framework in this part of the chapter.

Finally, we examine some special cases that arise in capital budgeting problems. For example, we describe how analysts adjust cash flows to choose between projects that have different lives, how to determine when an existing piece of equipment should be replaced, how to determine the cost of using excess capacity for a project, and when to harvest (or sell) an asset.

11.1 Calculating Project Cash Flows
LEARNING OBJECTIVE

Explain why incremental after-tax free cash flows are relevant in evaluating a project and calculate them for a project.
We begin our discussion of cash flows in capital budgeting by describing the mechanics of cash flow calculations and the rules for estimating the cash flows for individual projects. You will see that the approach we use to calculate project cash flows is similar to that used to calculate the cash flow to investors discussed in Chapter 3. However, there are two very important differences. First, the cash flows used in capital budgeting calculations are based on forecasts of future cash revenues, expenses, taxes, and investment outlays. In contrast, in Chapter 3 we focused on calculating historical cash flows to investors using accounting statements rather than the future cash flows that might be generated by the firm. Second, in capital budgeting we focus on estimating the cash flows we expect an individual project to produce in the future, which we refer to as incremental after-tax free cash flows. In contrast, the cash flow to investors in Chapter 3 is a measure of the cash flows generated by the entire firm.

Building Intuition
Capital Budgeting Is Forward Looking

In capital budgeting, we estimate the NPV of the cash flows that a project is expected to produce in the future. In other words, all of the cash flow estimates are forward looking. This is very different from using historical accounting statements to estimate cash flows.

Incremental After-Tax Free Cash Flows
The cash flows we discount in an NPV analysis are the incremental after-tax free cash flows that are expected from the project. The term incremental refers to the fact that these cash flows reflect how much the firm’s total after-tax free cash flows will change if the project is adopted. Thus, we define the incremental after-tax free cash flows (FCF) for a project as the total after-tax free cash flows the firm would produce with the project, less the total after-tax free cash flows the firm would produce without the project.

incremental after-tax free cash flows the difference between the total after-tax free cash flows at a firm with a project and the total after-tax free cash flows at the same firm without that project; a measure of a project’s total impact on the free cash flows at a firm

(11.1)
In other words, FCFProject equals the net effect the project will have on the firm’s cash revenues, costs, taxes, and investment outlays. These are the cash flows investors care about.

Throughout the rest of this chapter, we will refer to the total incremental after-tax free cash flows associated with a project simply as the FCF for the project. For convenience, we will drop the “Project” subscript from the FCF in Equation 11.1.

The FCF for a project is what we generically referred to as NCF in Chapter 10. The term free cash flows, which is commonly used in practice, refers to the fact that the firm is free to distribute these cash flows to creditors and stockholders because these are the cash flows that are left over after a firm has made necessary investments in working capital and long-term assets. The cash flows associated with financing a project (cash outflows or inflows to or from creditors or stockholders) are not included in the FCF calculation because, as we will discuss in Chapter 13, these are accounted for in the discount rate that is used in an NPV analysis. All of these points will become clearer as we discuss the FCF calculation next.

The FCF Calculation
The FCF calculation is illustrated in Exhibit 11.1. Let’s begin with an overall review of how the calculation is done. After that, we will look more closely at details of the calculation.

When we calculate the FCFs for a project, we first compute the incremental cash flow from operations (CF Opns) for each year during the project’s life. This is the cash flow that the project is expected to generate after all operating expenses and taxes have been paid. To obtain the FCF, we then subtract the incremental capital expenditures (Cap Exp) and the incremental additions to working capital (Add WC) required for the project. Cap Exp and Add WC represent the net investments in long-term assets, such as property, plant, and equipment, and in working capital items, such as cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, inventory, and accounts payable, which must be made if the project is pursued.

incremental cash flow from operations (CF Opns) the cash flow that a project generates after all operating expenses and taxes have been paid but before any cash outflows for investments

incremental capital expenditures (Cap Exp) the net investments in property, plant, and equipment and other long-term assets that must be made if a project is pursued

incremental additions to working capital (Add WC) the net investments in working capital items, such as cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, inventory, and accounts payable, that must be made if the project is pursued

As we noted earlier, the calculation of free cash flows for capital budgeting, which is summarized in Exhibit 11.1, is very similar to the calculation of the cash flows to investors that we discussed in Chapter 3. This should not be surprising since managers evaluate projects based on the present value of the cash flows they are expected to produce for their firms’ investors. Nevertheless, there is an important computational difference between the cash flow calculations in Chapters 3 and 11. In Exhibit 11.1 the taxes for a project analysis are computed by multiplying the project’s operating profit (EBIT) by the firm’s marginal tax rate. This calculation gives us the taxes that the firm will owe on a project if no debt is used to finance that project. In contrast, the calculation in Chapter 3 uses the actual taxes paid by the firm, including the effect that interest deductions have on the taxes owed. It is true that interest payments will reduce the taxable income from a project if any debt financing is used. However, we ignore this reduction when evaluating a project for two reasons. First, we want to exclude the effects associated with how the project is financed in order to isolate the cash flows from the project itself. Second, as we discuss in Chapter 13, the cost of both debt and equity financing for a project, including the impact of using debt financing on the firm’s tax obligations, are reflected in the discount rate. Doing the calculation this way makes it easier to estimate the NPV of a project under alternative financial structures.

EXHIBIT 11.1 The Free Cash Flow Calculation for a Project

This exhibit shows how the incremental after-tax free cash flow (FCF) for a project is calculated. The FCF equals the change in the firm’s cash income, excluding interest expense, that the project generates, plus depreciation and amortization for the project, minus all required capital expenditures and investments in working capital. FCF also equals the incremental after-tax cash flow from operations minus the net capital expenditures and investments in working capital required for the project.

Explanation	Calculation	Formula
The change in the firm’s cash income, excluding interest expense, resulting from the project		
Adjustments for the impact of depreciation and amortization and investments on FCF		
Building Intuition
Incremental After-Tax Free Cash Flows Are What Stockholders Care About in Capital Budgeting

When evaluating a project, managers focus on the FCF that the project is expected to produce because that is what stockholders care about. The FCFs reflect the impact of the project on the firm’s overall cash flows. They also represent the additional cash flows that can be distributed to security holders if the project is accepted. Only after-tax cash flows matter because these are the cash flows that are actually available for distribution after taxes are paid to the government.

Since the FCF calculation gives us the after-tax cash flows from operations over and above what is necessary to make any required investments, the FCFs for a project are the cash flows that the firm’s investors can expect to receive from the project. This is why we discount the FCFs when we compute the NPV.

The formula for the FCF calculation can also be written as:

(11.2)
where revenue is the incremental revenue (net sales) associated with the project, D&A is the incremental depreciation and amortization associated with the project, and t is the firm’s marginal tax rate.

incremental depreciation and amortization (D&A) the depreciation and amortization charges that are associated with a project

firm’s marginal tax rate (t) the tax rate that is applied to each additional dollar of earnings at a firm

Let’s use Equation 11.2 to work through an example. Suppose you are considering purchasing a new truck for your plumbing business. This truck will increase revenues $50,000 and operating expenses $30,000 in the next year. Depreciation and amortization charges for the truck will equal $10,000 next year, and your firm’s marginal tax rate will be 25 percent. Capital expenditures of $3,000 will be required to offset wear and tear on the truck, but no additions to working capital will be required. To calculate the FCF for the project in the next year, you can simply substitute the appropriate values into Equation 11.2:

The FCF calculated with Equation 11.2 equals the total annual cash flow the firm will produce with the project less the total cash flow the firm will produce without the project. Even so, it is important to note that it is not necessary to actually estimate the firm’s total cash flows in an NPV analysis. We need only estimate the cash outflows and inflows that arise as a direct result of the project in order to value it. The idea that we can evaluate the cash flows from a project independently of the cash flows for the firm is known as the stand-alone principle. The stand-alone principle says that we can treat the project as if it were a stand-alone firm that has its own revenue, expenses, and investment requirements. NPV analysis compares the present value of the FCF from this stand-alone firm with the cost of the project.

stand-alone principle the principle that allows us to treat each project as a stand-alone firm when we perform an NPV analysis

To fully understand the stand-alone principle, it is helpful to consider an example. Suppose that you own shares of stock in Twitter Inc., and that Twitter’s stock is currently selling for $44.00 per share. Now suppose that Twitter’s management announces it will immediately invest $799 million in data centers that are expected to produce after-tax cash flows of $200 million per year forever. Since Twitter has 799 million shares outstanding, this means that the investment will equal $1.00 per share ($799 million/799 million shares = $1.00 per share). The annual increase in Twitter’s cash flows is expected to be $0.25 per share per year ($200 million/799 million shares = $0.250 per share). How should this announcement affect the value of a share of Twitter stock?

Given that the project generates $0.250 in incremental cash flow per share forever, the present value of the project can be valued as a perpetuity. If the appropriate cost of capital for the project is 10 percent, then from Equation 9.2 and the discussion in Chapter 10, we know that the value of a share of Twitter’s stock should increase by D/R = $0.250/0.10 = $2.50 less the $1.00 invested, or $1.50, making each share of Twitter stock worth $44.00 + $1.50 = $45.50 after the announcement. This example illustrates how the stand-alone principle allows us to simply add the value of a project’s cash flows to the value of the firm’s other cash flows to obtain the total value of the firm with the project.

Cash Flows from Operations
Let’s examine Exhibit 11.1 in more detail to better understand why FCF is calculated as it is. First, note that the incremental cash flow from operations, CF Opns, equals the incremental net operating profits after tax (NOPAT) plus D&A.

incremental net operating profits after tax (NOPAT) a measure of the impact of a project on the firm’s cash net income, excluding the effects of any interest expenses associated with financing the project

If you refer back to the discussion of the income statement in Chapter 3, you will notice that NOPAT is essentially a cash flow measure of the incremental net income from the project without interest expenses. In other words, it is the impact of the project on the firm’s cash flow, excluding the effects of any interest expenses associated with financing the project. We exclude interest expenses when calculating NOPAT for an NPV analysis because, as we mentioned earlier, the cost of financing a project is reflected in the discount rate.

We use the firm’s marginal tax rate, t, to calculate NOPAT because the profits from a project are assumed to be incremental to the firm. Since the firm already pays taxes, the appropriate tax rate for FCF calculations is the tax rate that the firm will pay on any additional profits that are earned because the project is adopted. You may recall from Chapter 3 that this rate is the marginal tax rate. We will discuss taxes in more detail later in this chapter.

We add incremental depreciation and amortization, D&A, to NOPAT when calculating CF Opns because, as in the accounting statement of cash flows, D&A represents a noncash charge that reduces the firm’s tax obligation. Note that we subtract D&A before computing the taxes that the firm would pay on the incremental earnings for the project. This accounts for the ability of the firm to deduct D&A when computing taxes. However, since D&A is a noncash charge, we have to add it back to NOPAT in order to get the cash flow from operations right.

The net effect of subtracting D&A, computing the taxes, and then adding back D&A is to reduce the taxes attributable to earnings from the project. For example, suppose that EBITDA for a project is $100, D&A is $50, and t is 30 percent. If we did not subtract D&A before computing taxes and add it back to compute CF Opns, the taxes owed for the project would be $100 × 0.30 = $30, and CF Opns would be $100 − $30 = $70. This would understate CF Opns from this project by $15, since deducting D&A reduces the firm’s tax obligation by this amount. With this deduction, the correct tax obligation is ($100 − $50) × 0.30 = $15, and the correct CF Opns is $100 − $15 = $85. We get exactly this value when we compute CF Opns as shown in Exhibit 11.1 and Equation 11.2:

Since Revenue − Op Ex = EBITDA, as shown in Exhibit 11.1, we can write:

Cash Flows Associated with Capital Expenditures and Net Working Capital
Once we have estimated CF Opns, we simply subtract cash flows associated with the required investments to obtain the FCF for a project in a particular period. Investments can be required to purchase long-term tangible assets, such as property, plant, and equipment, to purchase intangible assets, such as patents, mailing lists, and brand names, or to fund current assets, such as cash and marketable securities, accounts receivables, and inventories.

tangible assets physical assets such as property, plant, and equipment

intangible assets nonphysical assets such as patents, mailing lists, and brand names

current assets assets, such as cash and marketable securities, accounts receivable, and inventories, that are expected to be liquidated (collected or sold) within one year

It is important to recognize that all investments that are incremental to a project must be accounted for. The most obvious investments are those in the land, buildings, and machinery and equipment that are acquired for the project. However, investments in intangible assets can also be required. For example, a manufacturing firm may purchase the right to use a particular production technology. Incremental investments in long-term tangible assets and intangible assets are collectively referred to as incremental capital expenditures (Cap Exp).

In addition to tangible and intangible assets, such as those described earlier, it is also necessary to account for incremental additions to working capital (Add WC). For example, if a new project will require that the firm increase the amount of cash that it keeps on hand, this increase must be accounted for. If the product being produced is going to be sold on credit, thereby generating additional accounts receivable, the cost of providing that credit must also be accounted for. Similarly, if it will be necessary to hold product in inventory, the cost of financing that inventory must be considered. Finally, it is important to consider any incremental changes in current liabilities associated with the project.

The FCF Calculation: An Example
Let’s work a more comprehensive example to see how FCF is calculated in practice. Suppose that you work at an outdoor performing arts center and are evaluating a project to increase the number of seats by building four new box seating areas and adding 5,000 seats for the general public. Each box seating area is expected to generate $400,000 in incremental annual revenue, while each of the new seats for the general public will generate $2,500 in incremental annual revenue. The incremental expenses associated with the new boxes and seating will amount to 60 percent of the revenues. These expenses include hiring additional personnel to handle concessions, ushering, and security. The new construction will cost $10 million and will be fully depreciated (to a value of zero dollars) on a straight-line basis over the 10-year life of the project. The arts center will have to invest $1 million in additional working capital immediately, but the project will not require any other working capital investments during its life. This working capital will be recovered in the last year of the project. The center’s marginal tax rate is 30 percent. What are the incremental cash flows from this project?

EXHIBIT 11.2 FCF Calculation Worksheet for the Performing Arts Center Project

A free cash flow (FCF) calculation table is useful in evaluating a project. It helps organize the calculations and ensure that they are completed correctly.

 	Year 0	Years 1 to 9	Year 10
Revenue		
_______	_______	_______
_______	_______	_______
_______	_______	_______
_______	_______	_______
−Cap Exp		
_______	_______	_______
When evaluating a project, it is generally helpful to first organize your calculations by setting up a worksheet such as the one illustrated in Exhibit 11.2. A worksheet like this helps ensure that the calculations are completed correctly. The left-hand column in Exhibit 11.2 shows the actual calculations that will be performed. Other columns are included for each of the years during the life of the project, from Year 0 (today) through the last year in the life of the project (Year 10). In this example the cash flows will be exactly the same for Years 1 through 9; therefore, for illustration purposes, we will only include a single column to represent these years. If you were using a spreadsheet, you would normally include one column for each year.

Unless there is information to the contrary, we can assume that the investment outlay for this project will be made today (Year 0). We do this because in a typical project, no revenue will be generated and no expenses will be incurred until after the investment has been made. Consequently, the only cash flows in Year 0 are those for new construction (Cap Exp = $10,000,000) and additional working capital (Add WC = $1,000,000). The FCF in Year 0 will therefore equal −$11,000,000.

In Years 1 through 9, incremental revenue (Revenue) will equal:

Incremental Op Ex will equal 0.60 × $14,100,000 = $8,460,000. Finally, depreciation (there is no amortization in this example) is computed as:

Note that only the Cap Exp are depreciated and that these capital expenditures will be completely depreciated or written off over the 10-year life of the project because no salvage value is anticipated. Working capital is not depreciated because it will be recovered at the end of the project as the project’s inventory is sold off, receivables are collected, and short-term liabilities are repaid.

The cash flows in Year 10 will be the same as those in Years 1 through 9 except that the $1 million invested in additional working capital will be recovered in the last year. The $1 million is added back to (or a negative number is subtracted from) the incremental cash flows from operations in the calculation of the Year 10 cash flows.

EXHIBIT 11.3 Completed FCF Calculation Worksheet for the Performing Arts Center Project

The completed calculation table shows how the incremental after-tax free cash flows (FCF) for the performing arts center project are computed, along with the NPV for that project when the cost of capital is 10 percent.

 	Year 0	Years 1 to 9	Year 10
Revenue		  $14,100,000	  $14,100,000
__________		
__________		
__________		
__________		
−Cap Exp	    $10,000,000	                      0	                      0
NPV @ 10%	   $15,487,664		
The completed cash flow calculation worksheet for this example is presented in Exhibit 11.3. We could have completed the calculations without the worksheet. However, as mentioned, a cash flow calculation worksheet is a useful tool because it helps us make sure we don’t forget anything. Once we have set up the worksheet, calculating the incremental cash flows is simply a matter of filling in the blanks. As you will see in the following discussion, correctly filling in some blanks can be difficult at times, but the worksheet keeps us organized by reminding us which blanks have yet to be filled in.

Notice that with a discount rate of 10 percent, the NPV of the cash flows in Exhibit 11.3 is $15,487,664. As in Chapter 10, the NPV is obtained by calculating the present values of all of the cash flows and adding them up. You might confirm this by doing this calculation yourself. The Using Excel Example on the next page illustrates the setup for the performing arts center project analysis in Excel.

FCF versus Accounting Earnings
It is worth stressing again that the FCF we have been discussing in this section is what matters to investors. The impact of a project on a firm’s overall value or on its stock price does not depend on how the project affects the company’s accounting earnings. It depends only on how the project affects the company’s free cash flows.

Recall that accounting earnings can differ from cash flows for a number of reasons, making accounting earnings an unreliable measure of the costs and benefits of a project. For example, as soon as a firm sells a good or provides a service, its income statement will reflect the associated revenue and expenses, regardless of whether the customer has paid cash.

Accounting earnings also reflect noncash charges, such as depreciation and amortization, which are intended to account for the costs associated with deterioration of the assets in a business as those assets are used. Depreciation and amortization rules can cause substantial differences between cash flows and reported income because the assets acquired for a project are generally depreciated over several years, even though the actual cash outflow for their acquisition typically takes place at the beginning of the project.

Decision Making Example 11.1 illustrates how expected free cash flows can affect an investment decision.

Using Excel
Performing Arts Center Project

Cash flow calculations for capital budgeting problems are best set up and solved using a spreadsheet. Here is the setup for the performing arts center project:


The following is the formula setup for the performing arts center project. As we did in Exhibit 11.3, we have combined Years 1 through 9 in a single column to save space. As mentioned in previous chapters, notice that none of the values in the actual worksheet are hard coded but instead use references from the key assumptions list, or specific formulas. This allows for an easy analysis of the impact of changes in the assumptions.


DECISION MAKING EXAMPLE 11.1
Free Cash Flows

Situation

You have saved $6,000 and plan to use $5,500 to buy a motorcycle. However, just before you go to the motorcycle dealership, a friend asks you to invest your $6,000 in a local delivery business she is starting. Assuming she can raise the money, your friend has two alternatives regarding how to market the business. As illustrated below, both of these alternatives have an NPV of $2,614 with an opportunity cost of capital of 12 percent. The business has a marginal tax rate of 25 percent. You will receive all free cash flows from the business until you have recovered your $6,000 plus 12 percent interest. After that, you and your friend will split any additional cash proceeds. If you decide to invest, which alternative would you prefer that your friend choose?

 	Alternative 1		Alternative 2
 	Year 0	Year 1	Year 2		Year 0	Year 1	Year 2
Revenue	 	$12,000	$12,000		 	 	 
__________	      	      		__________		   
__________	      	      		__________		   
__________	      	      		__________		   
__________	      	      		__________		   
−Cap Exp	      $5,000	      2,000	      500		       $5,000	500	  500
     	      	   		      		
NPV @ 10%	   $2,614	 	 		    $2,614	 	 


Before You Go On
Why do we care about incremental cash flows at the firm level when we evaluate a project?
Why is D&A first subtracted and then added back in FCF calculations?
What types of investments should be included in FCF calculations?
11.2 Estimating Cash Flows in Practice
LEARNING OBJECTIVE

Discuss the five general rules for incremental after-tax free cash flow calculations and explain why cash flows stated in nominal (real) dollars should be discounted using a nominal (real) discount rate.
Now that we have discussed what FCFs are and how they are calculated, we are ready to focus on some important issues that arise when we estimate FCFs in practice. The first of these issues is determining which cash flows are incremental to the project and which are not. In this section we begin with a discussion of five general rules that help us do this. We then discuss why it is important to distinguish between nominal and real cash flows. Next, we discuss some concepts regarding tax rates and depreciation that are crucial to the calculation of FCF in practice. Finally, we describe and illustrate several other issues that might affect the calculation of FCF for the final year of a project.

Five General Rules for Incremental After-Tax Free Cash Flow Calculations
As discussed earlier, we must determine how a project would change the after-tax free cash flows of the firm in order to calculate its NPV. This is not always simple to do, especially in a large firm that has a complex accounting system and many other projects that are not independent of the project being considered. Fortunately, there are five rules that can help us isolate the FCFs specific to an individual project even under the most complicated circumstances.

Rule 1: Include cash flows and only cash flows in your calculations. Do not include allocated costs unless they reflect cash flows. Examples of allocated costs are charges that accountants allocate to individual businesses to reflect their share of the corporate overhead (the costs associated with the senior managers of the firm, centralized accounting and finance functions, and so forth).
To see how allocated costs can differ from actual costs (and cash flows), consider a firm with $3 million of annual corporate overhead expenses and two identical manufacturing plants. Each of these plants would typically be allocated one-half, or $1.5 million, of the corporate overhead when their accounting profitability is estimated.
Suppose now that the firm is considering building a third plant that would be identical to the other two. If this plant is built, it will have no impact on the annual corporate overhead cash expense. Someone in accounting might argue that the new plant should be able to support its “fair share” of the $3 million overhead, or $1 million, and that this overhead should be included in the cash flow calculation. Of course, this person would be wrong. Since total corporate overhead costs will not change if the third plant is built, no overhead should be included when calculating the incremental FCFs for this plant.
Rule 2: Include the impact of the project on cash flows from other product lines. If the product associated with a project is expected to affect sales of one or more other products at the firm, you must include the expected impact of the new project on the cash flows from the other products when computing the FCFs. For example, consider the analysis that managers at Apple Inc. would have done before giving the go-ahead for the development of the iPhone. Since, like iPods, the iPhone can store music, these analysts might have expected that the introduction of the iPhone would reduce annual iPod sales. If so, they would have had to account for the reduction in cash flows from lost iPod sales when they forecast the FCFs for the iPhone.
Similarly, if a new product is expected to boost sales of another, complementary, product, then the increase in cash flows associated with the new sales from that complementary product line should also be reflected in the FCFs. For example, consider how the introduction of the Apple iPad might affect music and video downloads from Apple iTunes. Many of the people who purchase an iPad and who have not previously downloaded songs and other content from iTunes will begin to do so. The cash flows from downloads by these new users are not directly tied to iPad sales, but they are incremental to those sales. If Apple had not introduced the iPad device, it would not have these iTunes sales. The analysis of the iPad project should have included the estimated impact of that project on cash flows from iTunes.
Rule 3: Include all opportunity costs. By opportunity costs, we mean the cost of giving up the next best opportunity.1 Opportunity costs can arise in many different ways. For example, a project may require the use of a building or a piece of equipment that could otherwise be sold or leased to someone else. To the extent that selling or leasing the building or piece of equipment would generate additional cash flow for the firm and the opportunity to realize that cash flow must be forgone if the project is adopted, thus it represents an opportunity cost.
To see why this is so, suppose that a project will require the use of a piece of equipment that the firm already has and that can be sold for $50,000 on the used-equipment market. If the project is accepted, the firm will lose the opportunity to sell the piece of equipment for $50,000. This is a $50,000 cost that must be included in the project analysis. Accepting the project reduces the amount of money that the firm can realize from selling excess equipment by this amount.
Rule 4: Forget sunk costs. Sunk costs are costs that have already been incurred. All that matters when you evaluate a project at a particular point in time is how much you have to invest in the future and what you can expect to receive in return for that investment. Past investments are irrelevant.
To see this, consider the situation in which your company has invested $10 million in a project that has not yet generated any cash inflows. Also assume that circumstances have changed so the project, which was originally expected to generate cash inflows with a present value of $20 million, is now expected to generate cash inflows with a value of only $2 million. To receive this $2 million, however, your company will have to invest another $1 million. Should your firm do it? Of course it should!
The sunk cost for this investment is $10 million. That money has been spent and is therefore not relevant for the decision of whether to invest $1 million now. Since the $1 million of new spending generates new cash flows worth $2 million, this is a project with a positive NPV of $1 million and it should be accepted. Another way to think about it is that if your company stops investing now, it will have lost $10 million. If it makes the investment, its total loss will be $9 million. Although neither is an attractive alternative, it should be clear that it is better to lose $9 million than it is to lose $10 million. The point here is that, while it is often painful to do, you should ignore sunk costs when computing project FCFs.
Rule 5: Include only after-tax cash flows in the cash flow calculations. The incremental pretax earnings of a project matter only to the extent that they affect the after-tax cash flows that the firm’s investors receive. For an individual project, as mentioned earlier, we compute the after-tax cash flows using the firm’s marginal tax rate because this is the rate that will be applied against the incremental cash flows generated by the project.
Let’s use the performing arts center project to illustrate how these rules are applied in practice. Suppose the following requirements and costs are associated with this project:

The chief financial officer requires that each project be assessed 5 percent of the initial investment to account for costs associated with the accounting, marketing, and information technology departments.
It is very likely that increasing the number of seats will reduce revenues next door at the cinema that your employer also owns. Attendance at the cinema is expected to be lower only when the performing arts center is staging a big event. The total impact is expected to be a reduction of $500,000 each year, before taxes, in the operating profits (EBIT) of the cinema. The depreciation of the cinema’s assets will not be affected.
If the project is adopted, the new seating will be built in an area where exhibits have been placed in the past when the center has hosted guest lectures by well-known painters or sculptors. The performing arts center will no longer be able to host such events, and revenue will be reduced by $600,000 each year as a result.
The center has already spent $400,000 researching demand for new seating.
You have just discovered that a new salesperson will be hired if the center goes ahead with the expansion. This person will be responsible for sales and service of the four new luxury boxes and will be paid $75,000 per year, including salary and benefits. The $75,000 is not included in the 60 percent figure for operating expenses that was previously mentioned.
EXHIBIT 11.4 Adjusted FCF Calculations and NPV for the Performing Arts Center Project

The adjustments described in the text result in changes in the FCF calculations and a different NPV for the performing arts center project.

 	Year 0	Years 1 to 9	Year 10
Revenue	 	$13,500,000  	$13,500,000  
−Op Ex	 	   8,100,000	   8,100,000
−New salesperson’s salary	 	        75,000	        75,000
−Lost cinema EBIT                        	__________	      500,000	      500,000
   EBITDA                                   	__________	$ 4,825,000	$ 4,825,000
−D&A                                                	__________	    1,000,000	    1,000,000
   EBIT                                        	__________	$ 3,825,000	$ 3,825,000
×(1 − t)                                            	__________	              0.70	              0.70
   NOPAT                                     	__________	$ 2,677,500	$ 2,677,500
+D&A                                                	__________	    1,000,000	    1,000,000
   CF Opns                                    	__________	$ 3,677,500	$ 3,677,500
−Cap Exp	$10,000,000	                    0	                    0
−Add WC                                           	  1,000,000	                    0	−1,000,000
=FCF                                   	−$11,000,000	$ 3,677,500	$ 4,677,500
NPV @ 10%	$11,982,189	 	 
What impact will these requirements and costs have on the FCFs for the project? Exhibit 11.4 shows their impact on the FCFs and NPV presented in Exhibit 11.3.

The 5 percent assessment sounds like an allocated overhead cost. To the extent that this assessment does not reflect an actual increase in cash costs, it should not be included. It is not relevant to the project. The analysis should include only incremental cash flows.
The impact of the expansion on the operating profits of the cinema is an example of how a project can erode or cannibalize business in another part of a firm. The $500,000 reduction in EBIT is relevant and should be included in the analysis.
The loss of the ability to use the exhibits area, the next best alternative to the new seating plan, represents a $600,000 opportunity cost. The center is giving up revenue from guest lecturers that require exhibit space in order to build the additional seating. This opportunity cost will be partially offset by elimination of the operating expenses associated with the guest lectures.
The $400,000 for research has already been spent. The decision of whether to accept or reject the project will not alter the amount spent for this research. This is a sunk cost that should not be included in the analysis.
The $75,000 annual salary for the new salesperson is an incremental cost that should be included in the analysis. Even though the marketing department is a corporate overhead department, in this case the salesperson must be hired specifically because of the new project.
The specific changes in the analysis from Exhibits 11.3 to 11.4 are as follows. Revenue and Op Ex after Year 0 have been reduced from $14,100,000 and $8,460,000, respectively, in Exhibit 11.3 to $13,500,000 and $8,100,000, respectively, in Exhibit 11.4. These changes reflect the $600,000 loss of revenues and the reduction in costs (60 percent of revenue) associated with the loss of the ability to host guest lectures. The $75,000 expense for the new salesperson’s salary and the $500,000 reduction in the EBIT of the cinema are then subtracted from Revenue, along with Op Ex. These changes result in EBITDA of $4,825,000 in Exhibit 11.4, compared with EBITDA of $5,640,000 in Exhibit 11.3. The net result is a reduction in the project NPV from $15,487,664 (in Exhibit 11.3) to $11,982,189 (in Exhibit 11.4).

LEARNING BY DOING APPLICATION 11.1
Using the General Rules for FCF Calculations

Problem

You have owned and operated a pizza parlor for several years. The space that you lease for your pizza parlor is considerably larger than the space you need. To more efficiently utilize this space, you are considering subdividing it and opening a hamburger stand. You know that your analysis should consider the overall impact of the hamburger project on the total cash flows of your business, but beyond estimating revenues and costs from hamburger-related sales and the investment required to get the hamburger business started, you are unsure what else you should consider. Based on the five general rules for incremental after-tax cash flow calculations, what other factors should you consider?





Learning by Doing Application 11.1 provides more insights regarding application of the five rules for incremental after-tax free cash flow calculations.

Nominal versus Real Cash Flows
In addition to following the five rules for incremental after-tax cash flow calculations, it is very important to make sure that all cash flows are stated in either nominal dollars or real dollars—not a mixture of the two. The concepts of nominal and real dollars are directly related to the discussion in Chapter 2 that distinguishes between (1) the nominal rate of interest and (2) the real rate of interest. Nominal dollars are the dollars that we typically think of. They represent the actual dollar amounts that we expect a project to generate in the future, without any adjustments. To the extent that there is inflation, the purchasing power of each nominal dollar will decline over time. When prices are going up, a given nominal dollar amount will buy less and less over time. Real dollars represent dollars stated in terms of constant purchasing power. When we forecast in real dollars, the purchasing power of the dollars in one period is equal to the purchasing power of the dollars in any other period.

nominal dollars dollar amounts that are not adjusted for inflation; the purchasing power of a nominal dollar amount depends on when that amount is received

real dollars inflation-adjusted dollars; the actual purchasing power of dollars stated in real terms is the same regardless of when those dollars are received

To illustrate the difference between nominal and real dollars, let’s consider an example. Suppose that the rate of inflation is expected to be 5 percent next year and that you just lent $100 to a friend for one year. If your friend is not paying any interest, the nominal dollar amount you expect to receive in one year is $100. At that time, though, the purchasing power of this $100 is expected to be only $95.24: $100/(1 + ΔPe) = $100/1.05 = $95.24, where ΔPe is the expected rate of inflation as discussed in Chapter 2. In other words, if inflation is as expected, when your friend repays the $100, it will buy only what $95.24 would buy today. You will have earned a real return of ($95.24 − $100)/$100 = −0.0476, or −4.76 percent, on this loan. Another way of thinking about this loan is that your friend is expected to repay you with dollars having a real value of only $95.24.

To understand the importance of making sure that all cash flows are stated in either nominal dollars or real dollars, it is useful to write the cost of capital (k) from Chapter 10 as:

(11.3)
In Equation 11.3, k is the nominal cost of capital that is normally used to discount cash flows and r is the real cost of capital.2 This equation tells us that the nominal cost of capital equals the real cost of capital, adjusted for the expected rate of inflation. This means that whenever we discount a cash flow using the nominal cost of capital, the discount rate we are using reflects both the expected rate of inflation (ΔPe) and a real return (r). If, on the one hand, we discounted a real cash flow using the nominal cost of capital, we would be overcompensating for expected inflation in the discounting process. On the other hand, if we discounted a nominal cash flow using the real cost of capital (r), we would be undercompensating for expected inflation.

In capital budgeting, we normally forecast cash flows in nominal dollars and discount them using the nominal cost of capital.3 As an alternative, we can state the cash flows in real terms and discount them using the real cost of capital. This alternative calculation will give us exactly the same NPV. To see this, consider a project that will require an investment of $50,000 in Year 0 and will produce FCFs of $20,000 a year in Years 1 through 4. With a 15 percent nominal cost of capital, the NPV for this project is:

Equation 11.3 can be used to calculate the real cost of capital if we recognize that it can be rearranged algebraically as:

With a 5 percent expected rate of inflation, the real cost of capital is therefore:

Discounting the nominal cash flows by the rate of inflation tells us that the real cash flows are:

Year 0	Year 1	Year 2	Year 3	Year 4
−$50,000	$20,000	$20,000	$20,000	$20,000
 	1 + 0.05	(1 + 0.05)2	(1 + 0.05)3	(1 + 0.05)4
= −$50,000	= $19,048	= $18,141	= $17,277	= $16,454
Therefore, when we discount the real cash flows using the real cost of capital, we see that the NPV is:

Notice that the present value of each of the annual cash flows is exactly the same when we use nominal cash flows and when we use real cash flows. This has to be the case because when we stated the NPV calculation in real dollars, we first divided the discount rate by 1.05. We then reduced the value of the future cash flows by discounting them by 5 percent. This is equivalent to reducing the numerator and the denominator in each present value calculation by the same fraction, which must result in the same answer.

Learning by Doing Application 11.2 illustrates how nominal and real rates of return can be compared when evaluating investment opportunities.

LEARNING BY DOING APPLICATION 11.2
The Investment Decision and Nominal versus Real Dollars

Problem

You are trying to decide how to invest $25,000, which you just inherited from a distant relative. You do not want to take any risks with this money because you want to use it as a down payment on a home when you graduate in three years. Therefore, you have decided to invest the money in securities that are guaranteed by the U.S. government. You are considering two alternatives: a three-year Treasury note and an inflation-indexed Treasury security. If you invest in the three-year Treasury note, you will be paid 3 percent per year in interest and will get your $25,000 back at the end of three years. If you invest in the inflation-indexed security, you will be paid 1 percent per year plus an amount that reflects actual inflation in each of the next three years. For example, if inflation equals 2 percent per year for each of the next three years, you will receive 3 percent each year in total interest. This interest on the inflation-indexed security will compound, and you will receive a single payment at the end of three years. If you expect inflation to average 2.5 percent per year over the next three years, should you invest in the three-year Treasury note or in the inflation-indexed Treasury security?





Tax Rates and Depreciation
The United States has a very complicated corporate tax system. Corporations pay taxes at the federal, state, and local levels. Some governmental jurisdictions tax income, while others tax property or some other measure of value. Furthermore, a wide variety of deductions and adjustments are made to income or other measures of value when computing the actual taxes that a corporation owes. A detailed discussion of the different taxes that corporations pay and how they are computed is beyond the scope of this text. However, at this point, it is important for you to be familiar with the tax system that we have in the United States and with the depreciation methods used for computing corporate tax obligations. These concepts are especially important in capital budgeting.

Marginal and Average Tax Rates

As we saw in Chapter 3, the average tax rate is the total taxes paid divided by taxable income. In contrast, the marginal tax rate is the tax rate that is paid on the last dollar of income earned. When you are making investment decisions, the relevant tax rate to use is usually the marginal tax rate. The reason is that new investments (projects) are expected to generate new cash flows, which will be taxed at the business’s marginal tax rate. As a result, it is important to consider any difference between the average tax rate and the marginal tax rate in financial decision making.

The 2021 federal tax rate for C-Corps is a flat 21 percent. This means that for federal taxes the marginal and average rates are a constant 21 percent. Some states, however, have a progressive tax system, under which companies pay a progressively larger share of their income in state taxes as their income rises. This happens in a progressive tax system because the marginal tax rate at low levels of income is lower than the marginal tax rate at high levels of income. The result is that many companies face “blended” state and federal tax rates that are progressive, and exceed the 21 percent federal rate.

Learning by Doing Application 11.3 illustrates calculation of marginal and average tax rates.

LEARNING BY DOING APPLICATION 11.3
Calculating Marginal and Average Tax Rates

Problem

Assume that you are operating the pizza parlor and hamburger stand described in Learning by Doing Application 11.1. Because the business has become complicated, you have incorporated. From now on, earnings are subject to a flat federal corporate tax rate of 21 percent. You also have to pay state corporate tax at a rate of 7.5 percent on taxable income up to $50,000 and at 9 percent on taxable income above $50,000.

If your corporation’s total taxable income is $200,000 in 2020, how much does it owe in federal and state taxes? What are the corporation’s marginal and average “blended” federal and state tax rates? If you were considering buying a new oven, which tax rate would you use when computing the free cash flows?





Taxes and Depreciation

Corporations keep two sets of books. One set is kept for preparing financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). These are the financial statements that appear in the annual report and other documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The other set is kept for computing the taxes that the corporation actually pays. Corporations must keep two sets of books because the GAAP rules for computing income are different from the rules that the IRS uses.

One especially important difference from a capital budgeting perspective is that the depreciation methods allowed by GAAP differ from those allowed by the IRS. The straight-line depreciation method illustrated earlier in this chapter in the performing arts center example is allowed by GAAP and is often used for financial reporting. In contrast, an “accelerated” method of depreciation, called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS), has been in use for U.S. federal tax calculations since the Tax Reform Act of 1986 went into effect.4 MACRS is an accelerated system in the sense that depreciation charges for all assets other than nonfarm real property (for example, buildings) are higher in the early years of an asset’s life than with the straight-line method. MACRS thus enables a firm to deduct depreciation charges sooner, thereby realizing the tax savings sooner and increasing the present value of the tax savings. Since we want to estimate the actual incremental cash flows from a project in capital budgeting, we use the depreciation method allowed by the IRS in our calculations. This is the method that determines how much of a tax deduction a corporation actually receives for an investment.

Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) the accelerated depreciation method that has been in use for U.S. federal taxes since the Tax Reform Act of 1986 went into effect

Exhibit 11.5 lists the percentage of the cost of an asset that can be depreciated in each year for assets with 3-, 5-, 7-, 10-, 15-, and 20-year allowable recovery periods. The recovery periods for specific types of assets are specified in the tax law that is passed by Congress and signed by the president. For instance, in 2020, the allowable recovery period was 5 years for computers and automobiles, 7 years for office furniture, 10 years for water transportation equipment such as barges, 15 years for railroad wharves and docks, 20 years for farm buildings, 27.5 years for residential rental property, and 39 years for nonresidential real property (such as manufacturing buildings). Residential rental and nonresidential real property are depreciated using the straight-line method. Depreciation charges are intended to represent the cost of wear and tear on assets in the course of business. However, since they are set through a political process, they may be greater than or less than the actual cost of this wear and tear.

EXHIBIT 11.5 MACRS Depreciation Schedules by Allowable Recovery Period

The MACRS schedule lists the tax depreciation rates that firms use for assets placed into service after the Tax Reform Act of 1986 went into effect. The table indicates the percentage of the cost of the asset that can be depreciated in each year during the period that it is being used. Year 1 is the year in which the asset is first placed into service.

Year	3-Year	5-Year	7-Year	10-Year	15-Year	20-Year
  1	    33.33%	    20.00%	    14.29%	    10.00%	    5.00%	    3.75%
  2	44.45	32.00	24.49	18.00	9.50	7.22
  3	14.81	19.20	17.49	14.40	8.55	6.68
  4	   7.41	11.52	12.49	11.52	7.70	6.18
  5	 	11.52	   8.93	   9.22	6.93	5.71
  6	 	   5.76	   8.92	   7.37	6.23	5.29
  7	 	 	   8.93	   6.55	5.90	4.89
  8	 	 	   4.46	   6.55	5.90	4.52
  9	 	 	 	   6.56	5.91	4.46
10	 	 	 	   6.55	5.90	4.46
11	 	 	 	   3.28	5.91	4.46
12	 	 	 	 	5.90	4.46
13	 	 	 	 	5.91	4.46
14	 	 	 	 	5.90	4.46
15	 	 	 	 	5.91	4.46
16	 	 	 	 	2.95	4.46
17	 	 	 	 	 	4.46
18	 	 	 	 	 	4.46
19	 	 	 	 	 	4.46
20	 	 	 	 	 	4.46
21	 	 	 	 	 	2.24
Total	100.00%	100.00%	100.00%	100.00%	100.00%	100.00%
Note that the percentages in each column of Exhibit 11.5 add up to 100 percent. This is because the tax law allows firms to depreciate 100 percent of the cost of an asset regardless of the expected salvage value of that asset. Consequently, when we use the MACRS schedule to determine the tax depreciation, we do not have to worry about the expected salvage value for the asset.5

Let’s consider an example to show how MACRS is applied. Suppose you are evaluating a project that will require the purchase of an automobile for $25,000. Since an automobile is a five-year asset under MACRS, you can use the percentages for a five-year asset in Exhibit 11.5 to calculate the annual depreciation deductions:

Notice that even though the automobile is a five-year asset, there is a depreciation charge in the sixth year. This is because MACRS assumes that the asset is placed in service in the middle of the first year. As a result, the firm is allowed a deduction for half of a year in Year 1, a full year in Years 2 through 5, and half of a year in Year 6.

Recall that the FCF calculation, Equation 11.1, included incremental depreciation along with incremental amortization (D&A). We put depreciation and amortization together in the calculation because amortization is a noncash charge (deduction) like depreciation. It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss amortization in detail because the rules that govern it are complex. However, you should know that, as was discussed in Chapter 3, amortization, like depreciation, is a deduction that is allowed under the tax law to compensate for the decline in value of certain, mainly intangible, assets used by a business.

Computing the Terminal-Year FCF
The FCF in the last, or terminal, year of a project’s life often includes cash flows that are not typically included in the calculations for other years. For instance, in the final year of a project, the assets acquired during the life of the project may be sold and the working capital that has been invested may be recovered. The cash flows that result from the sale of assets and recovery of working capital must be included in the calculation of the terminal-year FCF.

You can see this in the performing arts center example discussed earlier. Note that the Year 10, or terminal year, cash flows in this example are different from those in the other years. They include investment cash flows that reflect the recovery of net working capital investments. Net incremental additions to working capital (Add WC) that are due to the project are calculated as follows:

(11.4)
where the changes in cash and cash equivalents (marketable securities), accounts receivable, inventories, and accounts payable represent changes in the values of these accounts that result from the adoption of the project.

Looking at the components of Add WC, we can see that cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and inventories require the investment of capital, while accounts payable represent capital provided by suppliers. When a project ends, the cash and cash equivalents are no longer needed, the accounts receivable are collected, the inventories are sold, and the accounts payable are paid. In other words, the firm recovers the net working capital that has been invested in the project. To reflect this in the FCF calculation, the cash flow in the last year of the project typically includes a negative investment in working capital that equals the cumulative investment in working capital over the life of the project. It is very important to make sure that the recovery of working capital is reflected in the cash flows in the last year of a project. In some businesses, working capital can account for 20 percent or more of revenue, and excluding working capital recovery from the calculations can cause you to substantially understate the NPV of a project.

In some projects, there will also be incremental capital expenditures (Cap Exp) in the terminal year. This is because, for example, the assets acquired for the project are being sold or there are disposal costs associated with them. In the performing arts center example, Cap Exp is $0 in Year 10. This is because we were assuming that, other than the working capital, the investments at the beginning of the project would have no salvage value, there would be no disposal costs associated with the assets, and there would be no clean-up costs associated with the project in Year 10. When an asset is expected to have a salvage value, we must include the salvage value realized from the sale of the asset and the impact of the sale on the firm’s taxes in the terminal-year FCF calculations. Any costs that must be incurred to dispose of assets should also be included. Finally, clean-up costs, such as those associated with restoring the environment after a project, also must be included in the terminal-year FCF.

The salvage value realized from the sale of the assets used in a project includes both the cash that is actually realized when they are sold and, if the salvage value of any asset differs from its depreciated book value, the tax implications from the sale. To better understand how taxes affect the terminal-year cash flows for a project, let’s make the performing arts center example more realistic. Recall that the initial Cap Exp in the performing arts center example was $10 million, that we used straight-line depreciation, and that we assumed that the salvage value would be $0 in Year 10. Now that we know about MACRS, let’s more realistically assume that the allowable recovery period for this investment under MACRS is 10 years.

Exhibit 11.6 presents the depreciation calculations for this investment under MACRS. Note that since the amount of depreciation now changes over time, we can no longer present Years 1 through 9 together as we did in Exhibit 11.3. Also note that because MACRS allows only a half year of depreciation in Year 1, the book value of the investment is greater than $0 at the end of Year 10. In this case it is $328,000.

If we still assume a salvage value of $0 for this investment, the fact that the book value is positive means that the firm will have a tax loss when it writes off the remaining value of the investment at the end of the project. In other words, when the project ends, the firm will take a deduction when computing its taxes that equals the remaining $328,000 book value of the asset. With a 30 percent tax rate, this will result in a tax savings of $328,000 × 0.30 = $98,400. This tax savings must be reflected in the cash flow calculations in Year 10. Exhibit 11.7 illustrates the cash flow and NPV calculations for the performing arts center example with these changes. The $98,400 tax savings is included as a negative capital expenditure in Year 10 (as −98 since we are rounding to thousands).6 Notice that the NPV has increased from $15,487,664 in Exhibit 11.3 to $15,610,135. The $122,471 difference reflects the present value of the tax savings from using MACRS depreciation instead of straight-line depreciation plus the tax savings from the disposal of the asset.

EXHIBIT 11.6 MACRS Depreciation Calculations for the Performing Arts Center Project ($ thousands)

Using the percentages from the 10-year MACRS depreciation schedule in Exhibit 11.5, we can calculate the tax (MACRS) depreciation for each year during the life of the performing arts center project.

 	Year 1	Year 2	Year 3	Year 4	Year 5	Year 6	Year 7	Year 8	Year 9	Year 10
Depreciation Calculations	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Beginning book value	$10,000	$9,000	$7,200	$5,760	$4,608	$3,686	$2,949	$2,294	$1,639	  $983
MACRS percentage	 10.00%	18.00%	14.40%	11.52%	  9.22%	  7.37%	  6.55%	  6.55%	6.56%	6.55%
MACRS depreciation	  $1,000	  $1,800	  $1,440	  $1,152	   $922	   $737	   $655	   $655	   $656	   $655
Ending book value	  $9,000	  $7,200	  $5,760	  $4,608	  $3,686	  $2,949	  $2,294	  $1,639	   $983	   $328
EXHIBIT 11.7 FCF Calculations and NPV for Performing Arts Center Project with MACRS Depreciation ($ thousands)

This exhibit shows the FCF calculations and the NPV for the performing arts center project when MACRS is used to compute depreciation. These calculations correspond to those in Exhibit 11.3, which reflect straight-line depreciation. Notice that the NPV is greater with the MACRS system because the tax shields from the depreciation are realized sooner.

 	Year 0	Year 1	Year 2	Year 3	Year 4	Year 5	Year 6	Year 7	Year 8	Year 9	Year 10
Revenue	 	$14,100	$14,100	$14,100	$14,100	$14,100	$14,100	$14,100	$14,100	$14,100	$14,100
−Op Ex	 	    8,460	    8,460	    8,460	    8,460	    8,460	    8,460	    8,460	    8,460	    8,460	    8,460
  EBITDA      	 	$ 5,640	$ 5,640	$ 5,640	$ 5,640	$ 5,640	$ 5,640	$ 5,640	$ 5,640	$ 5,640	$ 5,640
−D&A	 	    1,000	    1,800	    1,440	    1,152	      922	      737	      655	      655	      656	      655
  EBIT            	 	$ 4,640	$ 3,840	$ 4,200	$ 4,488	$ 4,718	$ 4,903	$ 4,985	$ 4,985	$ 4,984	$ 4,985
×(1 − t)	 	      0.70	      0.70	      0.70	      0.70	      0.70	      0.70	      0.70	      0.70	      0.70	      0.70
    NOPAT      	 	$ 3,248	$ 2,688	$ 2,940	$ 3,142	$ 3,303	$ 3,432	$ 3,490	$ 3,490	$ 3,489	$ 3,490
+D&A	 	    1,000	    1,800	    1,440	    1,152	      922	      737	      655	      655	      656	      655
  CF Opns    	 	$ 4,248	$ 4,488	$ 4,380	$ 4,294	$ 4,225	$ 4,169	$ 4,145	$ 4,145	$ 4,145	$ 4,145
−Cap Exp	   $10,000	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	     −98
−Add WC	       1,000	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	            0	−1,000
=FCF            	−$11,000	$ 4,248	$ 4,488	$ 4,380	$ 4,294	$ 4,225	$ 4,169	$ 4,145	$ 4,145	$ 4,145	$ 5,243
NPV @ 10%	   $15,610	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
If the salvage value is greater than $0 but less than the book value of $328,000, the tax savings will be smaller than $98,400, and if the salvage value exceeds the book value, the firm will actually have a gain on the sale of the asset that will increase its tax liability. In either of these cases, you must include the proceeds from the sale of the assets and the tax effects in your cash flow calculations.

The general formula for calculating the tax on the salvage value for an asset is:

where t is the firm’s marginal tax rate.

To make sure we know how we use this equation, suppose that the salvage value (selling price) in Year 10 of the $10,000,000 investment in the performing arts center project is expected to be $1,000,000 and that the book value remains $328,000. In this case the firm will pay additional taxes of ($1,000,000 − $328,000) × 0.30 = $201,600 on the sale of the assets. Deducting this amount from the $1,000,000 that the firm receives from the sale of the assets yields after-tax proceeds of $798,400 and the cash flows illustrated in Exhibit 11.8. This $798,400 is greater than the $98,000 in Exhibit 11.7 and therefore the NPV for the project is greater.

Learning by Doing Application 11.4 illustrates calculation of the after-tax proceeds from the sale of an asset.

EXHIBIT 11.8 FCF Calculations and NPV for the Performing Arts Center Project with a $1 Million Salvage Value in Year 10 ($ thousands)

This exhibit shows the FCF calculations and NPV for the performing arts center project assuming that the salvage value of the $10 million capital investment is $1 million in Year 10. All other assumptions are the same as in Exhibit 11.7.

 	Year 0	Year 1	Year 2	Year 3	Year 4	Year 5	Year 6	Year 7	Year 8	Year 9	Year 10
CF Opns	 	$4,248	$4,488	$4,380	$4,294	$4,225	$4,169	$4,145	$4,145	$4,145	$4,145
−Cap Exp	  $10,000	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	    −798
−Add WC	       1,000	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	          0	−1,000
=FCF	−$11,000	$4,248	$4,488	$4,380	$4,294	$4,225	$4,169	$4,145	$4,145	$4,145	$5,943
NPV @ 10%	  $15,880	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
LEARNING BY DOING APPLICATION 11.4
Accounting for Taxes When Assets Are Sold

Problem

You have decided to replace an oven in your pizza parlor. The old oven originally cost $20,000. Depreciation charges of $15,000 have been taken since you acquired it, resulting in a current book value of $5,000. The owner of a restaurant down the street has offered you $3,000 for the old oven. If you accept this offer, how will the sale affect the cash flows from your business? Assume the marginal tax rate for your business is 23 percent.





Expected Cash Flows
It is very important to realize that in an NPV analysis we use the expected FCF for each year of the life of the project. Similar to the expected values calculated in Chapter 7, the expected FCF for a particular year equals the sum of the products of the possible outcomes (FCFs) and the probabilities that those outcomes will be realized.

Building Intuition
We Discount Expected Cash Flows in an NPV Analysis

Not only are the FCFs that we discount forward looking, but they also reflect expected FCFs. Each FCF is a weighted average of the cash flows from each possible future outcome, where the cash flow from each outcome is weighted by the estimated probability that the outcome will be realized. The expected FCF represents the single best estimate of what the actual FCF will be.

To better illustrate this point, suppose that you have just invented a new board game and are trying to decide whether you should produce and sell it. If you decide to go ahead with this project, you estimate that it will cost you $100,000 for the equipment necessary to produce and distribute the game. Also, you think there are three possible outcomes if you make this investment—game sales are excellent, game sales are good, and game sales are poor—and that the probabilities associated with these outcomes are 25 percent, 50 percent, and 25 percent, respectively. If the FCFs under each of these three outcomes are as illustrated in Exhibit 11.9, then the expected FCF values that you would discount in your NPV analysis are −$100.00, $48.75, $53.75, and $35.00 for years 0, 1, 2, and 3, respectively.7 You should confirm that each of these values is correct to make sure that you understand how to calculate an expected FCF.

With these FCF estimates, we can now calculate the NPV of the board game project. For instance, if your cost of capital is 10 percent, the NPV is:

Since the project has a positive NPV, you should accept it.

We use expected FCFs in an NPV analysis because uncertainties regarding project cash flows that are unique to the project should be reflected in the cash flow forecasts. In Chapter 13 we will discuss why analysts who try to account for such uncertainties by adjusting the discount rate, rather than the cash flows, are wrong.

EXHIBIT 11.9 Expected FCFs for New Board Game ($ thousands)

The expected FCF for each year during the life of the board game project equals the weighted average of the possible FCFs in that year.

 	 	Year
Outcome	Probability	0	1	2	3
Game sales are excellent	0.25	−$100      	$70      	$90      	$60      
Game sales are good	0.50	−100    	50    	55    	40    
Game sales are poor	0.25	−100    	25    	15    	0
Expected FCF	 	−$100.00	$48.75	$53.75	$35.00
Before You Go On
What are the five general rules for calculating FCF?
What is the difference between nominal and real dollars? Why is it important not to mix them in an NPV analysis?
What is a progressive tax system? What is the difference between a firm’s marginal and average tax rates?
How can FCF in the terminal year of a project’s life differ from FCF in the other years?
Why is it important to understand that cash flow forecasts in an NPV analysis are expected values?

You can learn more about incremental free cash flows at Investopedia.com, www.investopedia. Just enter “free cash flows” in the search window at the top of the page.


You can calculate the impact of inflation on purchasing power using the inflation calculator at www.westegg.com/inflation. This calculator compares how much it would cost you, in nominal dollars, to buy the same goods in any two years, from 1800 to today.


You can read more about tax rates and depreciation rules at the Internal Revenue Service Web site, www.irs.gov

11.3 Forecasting Free Cash Flows
LEARNING OBJECTIVE

Describe how distinguishing between variable and fixed costs can be useful in forecasting operating expenses.
Earlier, we discussed how to calculate the incremental free cash flows (FCFs) for a project. Of course, when we evaluate a project, we do not know exactly what the cash flows will be, and so we must forecast them. As the performing arts center example suggests, analysts do this for each line item in the FCF calculation for each year during the life of a project. We are now ready to discuss how these forecasts are prepared.

Cash Flows from Operations
To forecast the incremental cash flows from operations (CF Opns) for a project, we must forecast the incremental net revenue (Revenue), operating expenses (Op Ex), and depreciation and amortization (D&A) associated with the project, as well as the firm’s marginal tax rate. To forecast Revenue, analysts typically estimate the number of units that will be sold and the per-unit sales price for each year during the life of the project. The product of the number of units sold and the per-unit sales price equals the Revenue (assuming that the project does not affect other product lines). Separating the Revenue forecast into incremental unit sales and price forces the analyst to think clearly about how well the project has to perform in terms of actual unit sales in order to achieve the forecasted Revenue.

When forecasting Op Ex, analysts often distinguish between variable costs, which vary directly with unit sales, and fixed costs, which do not. To illustrate the difference, consider a situation in which the managers of a firm plan to introduce a video game console that uses virtual reality technology. An overseas design and manufacturing company will produce the components and ship them to the company, which will assemble, package, and ship the finished product. The main variable costs will be those associated with purchasing the components; the labor required for assembling the players; packaging materials; shipping; and perhaps sales and marketing. These variable costs will rise in direct proportion to the number of units produced. If the number of units doubles, for example, we would expect these costs to approximately double. Fixed costs, such as the costs associated with assembly space (assuming output can be increased by adding shifts rather than obtaining additional space) and administrative expenses, will not increase directly with the number of units sold.8

variable costs costs that vary directly with the number of units sold

fixed costs costs that do not vary directly with the number of units sold

Distinguishing between variable and fixed costs simplifies the forecasting problem. If company analysts estimate Revenue for a project from unit sales and price forecasts, as described earlier, then the analysts can forecast variable costs by multiplying the variable cost per unit by the number of units expected to be sold each year. Fixed cost forecasts, in contrast, will not typically vary as closely with unit sales. They tend to be based on explicit estimations of the cost of manufacturing (assembly) space, salaries and number of people required for administration of the project, and so forth.

Since D&A is determined by the amounts invested in depreciable assets and the lives over which these assets can be depreciated, this line item in the CF Opns calculation is computed based on the incremental capital expenditures (Cap Exp) associated with the project, the allowable recovery period, and the depreciation method used. Consequently, it is very important to carefully think through the size and timing of the Cap Exp and the nature of those assets to properly estimate the D&A deductions.

As discussed earlier, the tax rate that should be used when forecasting CF Opns is the marginal rate the firm expects to pay on the incremental cash flows generated by the project in the future. Past tax rates are relevant only to the extent that they tell us something about future tax rates. Federal, state, and local officials can change tax rates in the future, and to the extent that such changes can be predicted, they should be reflected in the cash flow forecasts. Unfortunately, such changes are difficult to predict. As a result, analysts normally use the firm’s current marginal tax rate.

Cash Flows Associated with Capital Expenditures and Net Working Capital
As discussed earlier, we must consider two general classes of investments when calculating FCF: incremental capital expenditures (Cap Exp) and incremental additions to working capital (Add WC). Each presents its own special challenges in the preparation of forecasts. In this section, we consider several issues related to forecasting Cap Exp and Add WC.

Capital Expenditures

Cap Exp forecasts in an NPV analysis reflect the expected level of investment during each year of the project’s life, including any inflows from salvage values and any tax costs or benefits associated with asset sales. As illustrated in the performing arts center example, capital expenditures are typically required at the beginning of a project. Many projects require an initial investment for the assets necessary to produce a product and then little or no investment until the end of the project, when the assets are sold for their salvage value.

Some projects, however, require substantial periodic investments to replace or refurbish assets or to shut down operations (clean-up costs) at the end of the project’s life. For example, a chemical plant project might require a substantial investment every few years to refurbish worn equipment. In addition, environmental regulations are likely to require that the property on which a chemical plant is built be restored to its previous condition when it is dismantled. Investments such as these should be included in cash flow forecasts wherever appropriate.

Net Working Capital

As shown in Equation 11.4, cash flow forecasts in an NPV analysis include four working capital items: (1) cash and cash equivalents, (2) accounts receivable, (3) inventories, and (4) accounts payable.

Requirements for cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable are typically forecast as constant percentages of revenue. The cash and cash-equivalent requirements represent the amount of cash needed to make timely payments to suppliers and employees, as well as for other ongoing expenses. This amount tends to vary with the nature of the project, but analysts can gain insights into the required level of cash, as a percentage of revenue, by examining the cash-to-revenue ratios for companies that operate comparable businesses. For example, if you are forecasting cash flows for a hotel project, you might look at the ratio of cash to revenue at public companies that are focused on the hotel business for an indication of how much cash is required per dollar of revenue.

Forecasting accounts receivable is relatively straightforward. If customers will be given 30 days to pay for purchases and, on average, are expected to take 30 days to pay, the average accounts receivable balance will equal 30 days’ worth of revenue or 30 days/365 days per year = 0.0822, or 8.22 percent of annual revenue. This represents the amount of money that must be set aside to finance purchases by customers. For example, a company with $100 million in annual revenue can expect to have $8.22 million invested in accounts receivable at any point in time if its customers take an average of 30 days to pay for their purchases.

Inventories and accounts payable are generally forecast as a percentage of the cost of goods sold. Inventories are forecast this way because the cost of goods sold represents a measure of the amount of money actually invested in inventories. Accounts payable are forecast this way because the cost of goods sold is a measure of the amount of money actually owed to suppliers.

Before You Go On
What is the difference between variable and fixed costs, and what are examples of each?
How are working capital items forecast? Why are accounts receivable typically forecast as a percentage of revenue and accounts payable and inventories as percentages of the cost of goods sold?

You can find a number of free Excel spreadsheets that can be used to forecast free cash flows and use these cash flows to value projects and entire firms at The Corporate Finance Institute’s Web site. Go to www.corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/templates/excel-modeling/

11.4 Special Cases
LEARNING OBJECTIVE

Explain the concept of equivalent annual cost and use it to compare projects with unequal lives, decide when to replace an existing asset, and calculate the opportunity cost of using an existing asset.
Now that we have discussed the fundamental concepts underlying NPV analysis (in Chapter 10) and how cash flows are calculated (in this chapter), we can turn our attention to some special cases that arise in capital budgeting. As you will see, dealing with these special cases generally involves the application of concepts that we have already discussed, along with a dose of common sense.

Projects with Different Lives
One problem that arises quite often in capital budgeting involves choosing between two mutually exclusive investments. Recall from Chapter 10 that if investments are mutually exclusive, the manager can choose one investment or the other, but not both. This choice is simple if the expected lives of the two investments are the same. We choose the investment with the larger NPV. This type of problem was illustrated in Chapter 10.

The analysis becomes more complicated, however, if the investments have different lives. For example, suppose that you run a lawn-mowing service and have to replace one of your mowers. Further suppose that you have two options: mower A, which costs $250 and is expected to last two years, and mower B, which costs $360 and is expected to last three years.

If the mowers are identical in every other way and you expect to be in the mowing business for a long time (in other words, you are going to continue to replace mowers as they wear out for the foreseeable future), then you cannot decide which mower to buy simply by comparing the $250 cost of mower A with the $360 cost of mower B. Mower A will provide two years of service, while mower B will provide three years of service.9

You might be tempted to choose the mower with the lower initial investment per year of service. For example, you might choose mower B because the initial investment is $120 per year of service ($360/3 years = $120 per year) while mower A requires an initial investment of $125 per year of service ($250/2 years = $125 per year). As you will see, however, this reasoning can get you into trouble.

In this situation, we can effectively make the lives of the mowers the same by assuming repeated investments over some identical period and comparing the NPVs of their costs. We can do this by considering a six-year investment period. We determine the six-year period by multiplying the life of mower A by the life of mower B (2 × 3 = 6). In six years you would buy mower A three times—in Years 0, 2, and 4—or mower B twice—in Years 0 and 3. If we assume that the cost of each mower will remain the same over the next six years, and if we use a 10 percent opportunity cost of capital, the NPVs of the costs of the two alternatives are:

Notice that mower A is actually cheaper over a six-year investment cycle. Over this period, it costs $627.36/6 = $104.56 per year in today’s dollars, while mower B costs $630.47/6 = $105.08 per year.

Often, a much more efficient way of solving a problem of this nature is to compute the equivalent annual cost (EAC). The EAC can be calculated as follows:

(11.5)
where k is the opportunity cost of capital, NPVi is the NPV of the investment i, and t is the life of the investment.

equivalent annual cost (EAC) the annual dollar amount of an annuity that has a life equal to that of a project and that also has a present value equal to the present value of the cash flows from the project; the term comes from the fact that the EAC calculation is often used to calculate a constant annual cost associated with projects in order to make comparisons

Using Equation 11.5, we find that the EACs for mowers A and B are:

and

We can see that the EAC gives us the same answer as equating the lives of the investments and calculating the NPVs over a six-year investment cycle. This is to be expected, since the EAC simply reflects the annuity that has the same present value as the cost of an investment over the investment period we are considering. For instance, the NPV of the EAC for mower A over a six-year period is

This is the same NPV we obtained earlier (allowing for rounding differences).

The problem is similar but a bit more complicated if the revenues or operating costs associated with the two mowers differ. For simplicity, let’s continue to assume that the mowers will generate the same revenue per year, but let’s also assume that mower A will cost $50 per year to maintain and mower B will cost $55 per year to maintain. The NPVs of the two mowers in this case are:

The EACs are:

and

Of course, we still want to choose mower A in this case since all that has really happened is that the EAC of mower A has gone up by $50 and the EAC of mower B has gone up by $55. In contrast, if the annual cost of maintaining mower A is $50 and the annual cost of maintaining mower B is $49, we would choose mower B. As confirmation, you should try the calculations for this example.

One other point should be made about the EAC concept. Despite its name, it does not apply only to costs. If we included revenues in the above analysis and both mowers had positive NPVs, we could still use the EAC formula to compare the two alternatives. The only difference in this case is that the decision criteria would be to choose the most positive EAC instead of the least negative.

Learning by Doing Application 11.5 illustrates another example of how EAC can be used to compare projects with different lives.

LEARNING BY DOING APPLICATION 11.5
Using EAC to Compare Projects with Different Lives

Problem

You are looking at new ovens for your pizza parlor, and you see two models that would work equally well. Model A would cost $40,000 and last 10 years. Model B would cost $50,000 but would last 12 years and would require $500 less electricity per year than model A. Which model is less expensive? Assume a 10 percent opportunity cost of capital.





When to Replace an Existing Asset
Occasionally, financial managers are asked to determine the appropriate time to replace an existing piece of equipment that is still operating. In these situations they must answer two fundamental questions: Do the benefits of replacing the existing machine exceed the costs, and if they do not now, when will they?

Let’s examine how these questions can be answered for a situation that commonly arises in the lawn-mowing business. Suppose you have an old mower that is working perfectly well, but you are considering upgrading to a faster model. The old mower will run for another three years before it has to be replaced and will generate cash inflows, net of costs, of $6,500 for each of the next three years. The new mower costs $2,000 and would bring in net cash flows of $7,000 for four years. When should you replace the old mower?

Solving this problem is simply a matter of computing the EAC for the new mower and comparing it with the annual cash inflows from the old mower. With a 10 percent opportunity cost of capital, the NPV of the new mower is:

Therefore, the EAC is:

In this example, the old mower should not be replaced until it wears out because it will generate net cash inflows of $6,500 for each of the next three years, while the EAC for the new mower is only $6,369.

Now suppose that, instead of remaining constant at $6,500, cash inflows from the old mower will decline from $6,500 in Year 1, to $6,000 in Year 2, and to $5,500 in Year 3 as maintenance expenditures and downtime increase near the end of the old mower’s useful life. As the EAC for the new mower is $6,369, the old machine should be replaced after the first year.

Decision Making Example 11.2 illustrates another example of how EAC can be used to decide when to replace an asset.

The Cost of Using an Existing Asset
In Section 11.2 we discussed five general rules for calculating the incremental after-tax free cash flows associated with a project. The third rule is to include all opportunity costs. Unfortunately, opportunity costs are not always directly observable. Sometimes they have to be computed. This is particularly true when the opportunity cost relates to the use of excess capacity associated with an existing asset.

To see how we can evaluate opportunity costs of this kind, consider an example. Suppose you run a plant that mixes, bags, and ships potting soil—the soil often used for potted plants kept in people’s homes. The bagging machine at your plant has sufficient excess capacity to handle forecasted sales increases for the next five years if you stick to the potting-soil business. However, one of your managers has proposed that your plant diversify into the mulch business. If you use the existing bagging machine to bag mulch, you will have to purchase a second bagging machine in three years instead of in five years. The cost of a second, identical machine would be $100,000, and this machine would have a five-year life. If the appropriate opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent, how should you account for the opportunity cost of using the bagging machine when computing the NPV of the mulch project?

The first step is to compute the EAC for the second bagging machine. It is:

DECISION MAKING EXAMPLE 11.2
Deciding When to Replace an Asset

Situation

You are trying to decide when to replace your car. It is already five years old, and maintenance costs keep increasing each year as more and more parts wear out and need to be replaced. You do not really care whether or not your car is new, you just want a car that gets you around at the lowest cost. You expect maintenance costs for your car to be $1,000 next year and then increase by $500 each year after that. Your car will be worthless in five years. As an alternative, you can buy a new car with a five-year warranty that will cover all maintenance costs. The new car will cost $15,000, and you expect to be able to sell it for $10,000 in five years. The gas mileage for both cars is the same. You calculate the EAC for each option using a 10 percent opportunity cost of capital. The NPV for your old car is:

and the EAC is −$1,905.06. The NPV for the new car is:

and the EAC is −$2,318.99. When should you replace your old car?



This tells us that the bagging machine costs $26,380 per year. If you decide to get into the mulch business, this cost, which would not otherwise be incurred until Year 5, will also be incurred in Years 3 and 4. Therefore, the opportunity cost of using the excess bagging capacity equals the present value of the additional cost incurred in Years 3 and 4:

This cost should be included in the incremental cash flows for the mulch business. If the mulch project has a negative NPV with this cost, you might consider examining whether it has a positive NPV if you run the mulch business for only the next three years, while there is no constraint on the bagging capacity. A positive NPV in this latter analysis would indicate that the project should be pursued for three years and then abandoned.

11.5 Harvesting an Asset
LEARNING OBJECTIVE

Determine the appropriate time to harvest an asset.
Another problem that arises from time to time involves deciding when to harvest an investment. A classic example occurs in the timber industry, where a decision must be made about when to harvest timber. The longer the harvest is delayed, the greater the number of board feet that can be obtained (since trees grow) and, assuming the price of lumber is constant, the greater the value of the harvested lumber. If the number of board feet that will be realized in the harvest and the price per board foot at any point in time is known, making the right decision involves a relatively straightforward application of concepts that we have already discussed.

For example, suppose that you own some land on which you planted pine trees 10 years ago. The trees can be harvested and sold to a pulp mill at any time now, but you want to make sure that you choose the point in time that maximizes the NPV of your investment in the trees. You have estimated the NPV (which equals the after-tax cash flow at the time of the harvest) of harvesting the trees today (Year 0) and for each of the next four years to be as follows:

If each of these NPVs is stated in dollars as of the time when the harvest would take place, we cannot compare them directly. They must first be restated in dollars adjusted to the same point in time. If the opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent, we can make this adjustment simply by discounting each of the NPV values to Year 0. The discounted values are as follows:

where NPVx,y refers to the NPV in Year x dollars if the trees are harvested in Year y. From these numbers, we can see that harvesting at the end of Year 2 will produce the largest NPV in today’s dollars.

If you calculate the percentage increase in the nominal NPV values above, you can see that they increase by 15 percent from Year 0 to 1, by 13 percent from Year 1 to 2, by 9 percent from Year 2 to 3, and by 6 percent from Year 3 to 4. The optimal time to harvest is prior to the first year in which the rate of increase drops below the cost of capital. That is at the end of year 2 where the Year 0 NPV is $37,589. At this time it becomes optimal to harvest the trees and invest the proceeds in alternative investments that yield the opportunity cost of capital because you can earn more from the alternative investments. Another way of thinking about this is that you do not want to harvest as long as the asset is earning a return that is greater than or equal to the opportunity cost of capital. This general principle applies to all problems of this kind.

In our example, we are ignoring the fact that the sooner we harvest the trees, the sooner we can plant the next crop. In this sense the solution is somewhat simplistic—we should really be considering the NPVs for a series of crops—but it illustrates the key points that (1) you must state all NPV values as of the same point in time and (2) the optimal time to harvest an asset is when it is no longer earning at least the opportunity cost of capital.

Outside of the timber industry, these ideas are widely used to decide when to exit investments. For example, leveraged-buyout specialists, who buy companies with the intention of improving and then selling them within a few years, perform a very similar type of analysis when choosing the appropriate time to sell a company.

Before You Go On
When can we not simply compare the NPVs of two mutually exclusive projects?
When choosing between mutually exclusive projects with unequal lives, how can we ensure the best decision is made?
Under what circumstance would you replace an old machine that is still operating with a new one?
How do we decide when to harvest an asset?
Summary of Learning Objectives
1 Explain why incremental after-tax free cash flows are relevant in evaluating a project and calculate them for a project.

The incremental after-tax free cash flows, FCFs, for a project equal the expected change in the total after-tax free cash flows of the firm if the project is adopted. The impact of a project on the firm’s total cash flows is the appropriate measure of cash flows because these are the cash flows that reflect all of the costs and benefits from the project and only the costs and benefits from the project. The incremental after-tax free cash flows are calculated using Equation 11.2. This calculation is also illustrated in Exhibit 11.1.

2 Discuss the five general rules for incremental after-tax free cash flow calculations and explain why cash flows stated in nominal (real) dollars should be discounted using a nominal (real) discount rate.

The five general rules are as follows:

Rule 1: Include cash flows and only cash flows in your calculations. Stockholders care about only the impact of a project on the firm’s cash flows.

Rule 2: Include the impact of the project on cash flows from other product lines. If a project affects the cash flows from other projects, we must take this into account in the NPV analysis in order to fully capture the impact of the project on the firm’s total cash flows.

Rule 3: Include all opportunity costs. If an asset is used for a project, the relevant cost for that asset is the value that could be realized from its most valuable alternative use. By including this cost in the NPV analysis, we capture the change in the firm’s cash flows that is attributable to the use of this asset for the project.

Rule 4: Forget sunk costs. The only costs that matter are those to be incurred from this point on.

Rule 5: Include only after-tax cash flows in the cash flow calculations. Since stockholders receive cash flows after taxes have been paid, they are concerned only about after-tax cash flows.

Since a nominal discount rate reflects both the expected rate of inflation and a real return, we would be overadjusting for inflation if we discounted a real cash flow with a nominal rate. Similarly, if we discounted a nominal cash flow using a real discount rate, we would be undercompensating for expected inflation in the discounting process. This is why we discount nominal cash flows using only a nominal discount rate and we discount real cash flows using only a real discount rate.

3 Describe how distinguishing between variable and fixed costs can be useful in forecasting operating expenses.

Variable costs vary directly with the number of units sold, while fixed costs do not. When forecasting operating expenses, it is often useful to treat variable and fixed costs separately. We can forecast variable costs by multiplying unit variable costs by the number of units sold. Fixed costs are more accurately based on the specific characteristics of those costs, rather than as a function of sales. Separating fixed costs from variable costs also makes it easier to identify the factors that will cause them to change over time and therefore easier to forecast them.

4 Explain the concept of equivalent annual cost and use it to compare projects with unequal lives, decide when to replace an existing asset, and calculate the opportunity cost of using an existing asset.

The equivalent annual cost (EAC) is the annualized cost of an investment that is stated in nominal dollars. In other words, it is the annual payment from an annuity that has the same NPV and the same life as the project. Since it is a measure of the annual cost or cash inflow from a project, the EAC for one project can be compared directly with the EAC from another project, regardless of the lives of those two projects. Application of the EAC concept is illustrated in Section 11.4.

5 Determine the appropriate time to harvest an asset.

The appropriate time to harvest an asset is that point in time where harvesting the asset yields the largest present value, in today’s dollars, of the project NPV.

Summary of Key Equations
Equation	Description	Formula
11.1	Incremental free cash flow definition	FCFProject = FCFFirm with project − FCFFirm without project
11.2	Incremental free cash flow calculation	FCF = [(Revenue − Op Ex − D&A) × (1 − t)]+ D&A − Cap Exp − Add WC
11.3	Inflation and real components of cost of capital	1 + k = (1 + ΔPe) × (1 + r)
11.4	Incremental additions to working capital	Add WC = Change in cash and cash equivalents + Change in accounts receivable + Change in inventories − Change in accounts payable
11.5	Equivalent annual cost	
Self-Study Problems
11.1 Explain why the announcement of a new investment is usually accompanied by a change in the firm’s stock price.



11.2 In calculating the NPV of a project, should we use all of the after-tax cash flows associated with the project or incremental after-tax free cash flows from the project? Why?



11.3 You are considering opening a new restaurant in the Texas Burgers chain. The new restaurant will have annual revenue of $300,000 and operating expenses of $150,000. The annual depreciation and amortization for the assets used in the restaurant will equal $50,000. An annual capital expenditure of $10,000 will be required to offset wear and tear on the assets used in the restaurant, but no additions to working capital will be required. The marginal tax rate will be 30 percent. Calculate the incremental annual after-tax free cash flow for the project.



11.4 Sunglass Heaven, Inc., is launching a new store in a shopping mall in Houston. The annual revenue of the store depends on the weather conditions in the summer in Houston. The annual revenue will be $240,000 in a sizzling summer with a probability of 0.3, $80,000 in a cool summer with a probability of 0.2, and $150,000 in a normal summer with a probability of 0.5. What is the expected annual revenue for the store?



11.5 Sprigg Lane Manufacturing, Inc., needs to purchase a new central air-conditioning system for a plant. There are two choices. The first system costs $50,000 and is expected to last 10 years, and the second system costs $72,000 and is expected to last 15 years. Assume that the opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent. Which air-conditioning system should Sprigg Lane purchase?



Discussion Questions
11.1 Do you agree or disagree with the following statement, given the discussion in this chapter? We can calculate future cash flows precisely and obtain an exact value for the NPV of an investment.

11.2 What are the differences between cash flows used in capital budgeting calculations and past accounting earnings?

11.3 Suppose that FRA Corporation already has divisions in both Dallas and Houston. FRA is now considering setting up a third division in Austin. This expansion will require that one senior manager from Dallas and one from Houston relocate to Austin. Ignore relocation expenses. Is their annual compensation relevant to the decision to expand?

11.4 MusicHeaven, Inc., is a producer of media players, which currently have either 20 gigabytes or 30 gigabytes of storage. Now the company is considering launching a new production line making mini media players with 5 gigabytes of storage. Analysts forecast that MusicHeaven will be able to sell 1 million such mini media players if the investment is made. In making the investment decision, discuss what the company should consider other than the sales of the mini media players.

11.5 QualityLiving Trust is a real estate investment company that builds and remodels apartment buildings in northern California. It is currently considering remodeling a few idle buildings that it owns in San Jose into luxury apartment buildings. The company bought those buildings eight months ago. How should the market value of the buildings be treated in evaluating this project?

11.6 High-End Fashions, Inc., bought a production line for ankle-length skirts last year at a cost of $500,000. This year, however, miniskirts are in and ankle-length skirts are completely out of fashion. High-End has the option to rebuild the production line and use it to produce miniskirts with an annual operating cost of $300,000 and expected revenue of $700,000. How should the company treat the $500,000 cost of the old production line in evaluating the rebuilding plan?

11.7 How is the MACRS depreciation method under IRS rules different from the straight-line depreciation allowed under GAAP rules? What is the implication for incremental after-tax free cash flows from firms’ investments?

11.8 Explain the difference between marginal and average tax rates, and identify which of these rates is used in capital budgeting and why.

11.9 Under what circumstances will the sale of an asset result in a taxable gain? How do you estimate the taxes or tax benefit associated with the sale of an asset?

11.10 When two mutually exclusive projects have different lives, how can an analyst determine which is better? What is the underlying assumption in this method?

11.11 What is the opportunity cost of using an existing asset? Give an example of the opportunity cost of using the excess capacity of a machine.

11.12 You are providing financial advice to a shrimp farmer who will be harvesting his last crop of farm-raised shrimp. His crop is very young and will, therefore, grow and become more valuable as the shrimps’ weight increases. Describe how you would determine the appropriate time to harvest the shrimp. As this is the farmer’s last crop you can ignore the NPVs of any replacement crops.

Questions and Problems
 Excel templates and resources available in Wiley Course Resources.

Basic
11.1 Calculating project cash flows: Why do we use forecasted incremental after-tax free cash flows instead of forecasted accounting earnings in estimating the NPV of a project?

11.2 The FCF calculation: How do we calculate incremental after-tax free cash flows from forecasted earnings of a project? What are the common adjustment items?

11.3 The FCF calculation: How do we adjust for depreciation when we calculate incremental after-tax free cash flow from EBITDA? What is the intuition for the adjustment?

11.4 Nominal versus real cash flows: What is the difference between nominal and real cash flows? Which rate of return should we use to discount each type of cash flow?

11.5 Taxes and depreciation: What is the difference between average tax rate and marginal tax rate? Which one should we use in calculating incremental after-tax cash flows?

11.6 Computing terminal-year FCF: Healthy Potions, Inc., a pharmaceutical company, bought a machine at a cost of $2 million five years ago that produces pain-reliever medicine. The machine has been depreciated over the past five years, and the current book value is $800,000. The company decides to sell the machine now at its market price of $1 million. The marginal tax rate is 30 percent. What are the relevant cash flows? How do they change if the market price of the machine is $600,000 instead?

11.7 Cash flows from operations: What are variable costs and fixed costs? What are some examples of each? How are these costs estimated in forecasting operating expenses?

11.8 Cash flows from operations: When forecasting operating expenses, explain the difference between a fixed cost and a variable cost.

11.9 Investment cash flows: Zippy Corporation just purchased computing equipment for $20,000. The equipment will be depreciated using a five-year MACRS depreciation schedule. If the equipment is sold at the end of its fourth year for $12,000, what are the after-tax proceeds from the sale, assuming the marginal tax rate is 30 percent?

11.10 Investment cash flows: Six Twelve, Inc., is considering opening up a new convenience store in downtown New York City. The expected annual revenue at the new store is $800,000. To estimate the increase in working capital, analysts estimate that for firms in the same industry the ratio of cash and cash equivalents to revenue is 0.03 and the ratios of receivables, inventories, and payables to revenue are 0.05, 0.10, and 0.04, respectively. Applying these industry estimates to Six Twelve, Inc., what is the expected incremental cash flow related to working capital when the store is opened?

11.11 Investment cash flows: Keswick Supply Company wants to set up a division that provides copy and fax services to businesses. Customers will be given 20 days to pay for such services. The annual revenue of the division is estimated to be $25,000. Assuming that the customers take the full 20 days to pay, what is the incremental cash flow associated with accounts receivable?

11.12 Expected cash flows: Define expected cash flows, and explain why this concept is important in evaluating projects.

11.13 Projects with different lives: Explain the concept of equivalent annual cost and how it is used to compare projects with different lives.

11.14 Replace an existing asset: Explain how we determine the optimal time to replace an existing asset with a new one.

11.15 Projects with different lives: If you had to choose between one project with an expected life of five years and a second project with an expected life of six years, how could you do this without using the equivalent annual cost concept?

Intermediate
11.16 Nominal versus real cash flows: You are buying a sofa. You will pay $200 today and make three consecutive annual payments of $300 in the future. The real rate of return is 10 percent, and the expected inflation rate is 4 percent. What is the actual price of the sofa?

11.17 Nominal versus real cash flows: You are graduating in two years. You want to invest your current savings of $5,000 in bonds and use the proceeds to purchase a new car when you graduate. You can invest the money in either Bond A, a two-year bond with a 3 percent annual interest rate, or Bond B, an inflation-indexed two-year bond paying 1 percent real interest above the inflation rate (assume this bond makes annual interest payments). The inflation rate over the next two years is expected to be 1.5 percent. Assume that both bonds are default free and have the same market price. Which bond should you invest in?

11.18 Marginal and average tax rates. MoCo, Inc., operates in a state where companies face a tax rate of 9 percent on taxable income up to $1,000,000 and 10.5 percent on taxable income above $1,000,000. Assume the federal tax rate is a flat 21 percent and MoCo, Inc., will have taxable income of $1,500,000 for the year. What is the firm’s average blended federal and state tax rate? What is the firm’s marginal blended federal and state tax rate? If MoCo, Inc., is evaluating a new investment, what tax rate should it use for NPV calculations?

11.19 Investment cash flows: Healthy Potions, Inc., is considering investing in a new production line for eye drops. Other than investing in the equipment, the company needs to increase its cash and cash equivalents by $10,000, increase the level of inventory by $30,000, increase accounts receivable by $25,000, and increase accounts payable by $5,000 at the beginning of the project. Healthy Potions will recover these changes in working capital at the end of the project 10 years later. Assume the appropriate discount rate is 12 percent. What are the present values of the relevant investment cash flows?

11.20 Cash flows from operations: Given the desire to cut carbon emissions, Ford is considering introducing a new production line of electric sedans. The expected annual unit sales of the electric cars is 30,000, and the selling price is $22,000 per car. Variable costs of production are $10,000 per car. The fixed overhead, including salary of top executives, is $80 million per year. However, the introduction of the electric sedans will decrease Ford’s sales of regular sedans by 10,000 cars per year; the regular sedans have a unit price of $20,000, a unit variable cost of $12,000, and fixed costs of $250,000 per year. Depreciation costs of the new production line are $50,000 per year. The marginal tax rate is 29 percent. What is the incremental annual cash flow from operations?

11.21 FCF and NPV for a project: Archer Daniels Midland Company is considering buying a new farm that it plans to operate for 10 years. The farm will require an initial investment of $12 million. This investment will consist of $2 million for land and $10 million for trucks and other equipment. The land, all trucks, and all other equipment are expected to be sold at the end of 10 years for a price of $5 million, which is $2 million above book value. The farm is expected to produce revenue of $2 million each year, and annual cash flow from operations equals $1.8 million. The marginal tax rate is 25 percent, and the appropriate discount rate is 10 percent. Calculate the NPV of this investment.

11.22 Projects with different lives: You are trying to choose between purchasing one of two machines for a factory. Machine A costs $15,000 to purchase and has a three-year life. Machine B costs $17,700 to purchase but has a four-year life. Regardless of which machine you purchase, it will have to be replaced at the end of its operating life. Which machine should you choose? Assume a marginal tax rate of 21 percent and a discount rate of 15 percent.

11.23 Projects with different lives: You are starting a family pizza parlor and need to buy a motorcycle for delivery orders. You have two models in mind. Model A costs $9,000 and is expected to run for 6 years; Model B is more expensive, with a price of $14,000, and has an expected life of 10 years. The annual maintenance costs are $800 for Model A and $700 for Model B. Assume that the opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent. Which one should you buy?

11.24 When to harvest an asset: Predator LLC, a leveraged-buyout specialist, recently bought a company and wants to determine the optimal time to sell it. The partner in charge of this investment has estimated the after-tax cash flows from a sale at different times to be as follows: $700,000 if sold one year later; $1,000,000 if sold two years later; $1,200,000 if sold three years later; and $1,300,000 if sold four years later. The opportunity cost of capital is 12 percent. When should Predator sell the company? Why?

11.25 Replace an existing asset: Bell Mountain Vineyards is considering updating its current manual accounting system with a high-end electronic system. While the new accounting system would save the company money, the cost of the system continues to decline. Bell Mountain’s opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent, and the costs and values of investments made at different times in the future are as follows:

Year	Cost	Value of Future Savings (at time of purchase)
0	$5,000	$7,000
1	  4,500	  7,000
2	  4,000	  7,000
3	  3,600	  7,000
4	  3,300	  7,000
5	  3,100	  7,000
When should Bell Mountain buy the new accounting system?

11.26 Replace an existing asset: You have a 2000 Nissan that is expected to run for another three years, but you are considering buying a new Hyundai before the Nissan wears out. You will donate the Nissan to Goodwill when you buy the new car. The annual maintenance cost is $1,500 per year for the Nissan and $200 for the Hyundai. The price of your favorite Hyundai model is $18,000, and it is expected to run for 15 years. Your opportunity cost of capital is 3 percent. Ignore taxes. When should you buy the new Hyundai?

11.27 Replace an existing asset: Assume that you are considering replacing your old Nissan with a new Hyundai, as in the previous problem. However, the annual maintenance cost of the old Nissan increases as time goes by. It is $1,200 in the first year, $1,500 in the second year, and $1,800 in the third year. When should you replace the Nissan with the new Hyundai in this case?

11.28 When to harvest an existing asset: Anaconda Manufacturing Company currently owns a mine that is known to contain a certain amount of gold. Since Anaconda does not have any gold-mining expertise, the company plans to sell the entire mine and base the selling price on a fixed multiple of the spot price for gold at the time of the sale. Analysts at Anaconda have forecast the spot price for gold and have determined that the price will increase by 14 percent, 12 percent, 9 percent, and 6 percent during the next one, two, three, and four years, respectively. If Anaconda’s opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent, what is the optimal time for Anaconda to sell the mine?

11.29 Replace an existing asset: You are thinking about delivering pizzas in your spare time. Since you must use your own car to deliver the pizzas, you will wear out your current car one year earlier, which is one year from today, than if you did not take on the delivery job. You estimate that when you purchase a new car, regardless of when that occurs, you will pay $20,000 for the car and it will last you five years. If your opportunity cost of capital is 7 percent, what is the opportunity cost of using your car to deliver pizzas?

Advanced
11.30 You are the CFO of SlimBody, Inc., a retailer of the exercise machine Slimbody6 and related accessories. Your firm is considering opening a new store in Los Angeles. The store will have a life of 20 years. It will generate annual sales of 5,000 exercise machines, and the price of each machine is $2,500. The annual sales of accessories will be $600,000, and the operating expenses of running the store, including labor and rent, will amount to 50 percent of the revenues from the exercise machines. The initial investment in the store will equal $30 million and will be fully depreciated on a straight-line basis over the 20-year life of the store. Your firm will need to invest $2 million in additional working capital immediately and recover it at the end of the investment. Your firm’s marginal tax rate is 30 percent. The opportunity cost of opening up the store is 10 percent. What are the incremental free cash flows from this project at the beginning of the project as well as in Years 1–19 and 20? Should you approve it?

11.31 Merton Shovel Corporation has decided to bid for a contract to supply shovels to the Honduran Army. The Honduran Army intends to buy 1,000 shovels per year for the next three years. To supply these shovels, Merton will have to acquire manufacturing equipment at a cost of $150,000. This equipment will be depreciated on a straight-line basis over its five-year lifetime. At the end of the third year, Merton can sell the equipment for exactly its book value ($60,000). Additional fixed costs will be $36,000 per year, and variable costs will be $3 per shovel. An additional investment of $25,000 in net working capital will be required when the project is initiated. This investment will be recovered at the end of the third year. Merton Shovel has a 27 percent marginal tax rate and a 17 percent required rate of return on the project. What is the lowest possible per shovel price that Merton can offer for the contract and still create value for its stockholders?

11.32 Rocky Mountain Lumber, Inc., is considering purchasing a new wood saw that costs $50,000. The saw will generate revenues of $100,000 per year for five years. The cost of materials and labor needed to generate these revenues will total $60,000 per year, and other cash expenses will be $10,000 per year. The machine is expected to sell for $1,000 at the end of its five-year life and will be depreciated on a straight-line basis over five years to zero. Rocky Mountain’s tax rate is 26 percent, and its opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent. Should the company purchase the saw? Explain why or why not.

11.33 A beauty product company is developing a new fragrance named Happy Forever. There is a probability of 0.5 that consumers will love Happy Forever, and in this case, annual sales will be 1 million bottles; a probability of 0.4 that consumers will find the smell acceptable and annual sales will be 200,000 bottles; and a probability of 0.1 that consumers will find the smell unpleasant and annual sales will be only 50,000 bottles. The selling price is $38, and the variable cost is $8 per bottle. Fixed production costs will be $1 million per year, and depreciation will be $1.2 million. Assume that the marginal tax rate is 27 percent. What are the expected annual incremental after-tax free cash flows from the new fragrance?

11.34 Great Fit, Inc., is a company that manufactures clothing. The company has a production line that produces women’s tops of regular sizes. The same machine could be used to produce petite sizes as well. However, the remaining life of the machines will be reduced from four years to two years if the petite size production is added. The cost of identical machines with a life of eight years is $2 million. Assume the opportunity cost of capital is 8 percent. What is the opportunity cost of adding petite sizes?

11.35 Biotech Partners LLC has been farming a new strain of radioactive-material-eating bacteria that the electrical utility industry can use to help dispose of its nuclear waste. Two opposing factors affect Biotech’s decision of when to harvest the bacteria: the growth rate of the bacteria and its market price. The bacteria are currently growing at a 22 percent annual rate. Due to competition from other top firms, Biotech analysts estimate that the price for the bacteria will decline according to the schedule below. If the opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent, and free cash flows change in the same way as the change in market price, Biotech should harvest the entire bacteria colony at the end of which year?

Year	Change in Price Due to Competition (%)
1	       5%
2	  −2
3	  −8
4	−10
5	−15
6	−25
11.36 ACME Manufacturing management is considering replacing an existing production line with a new line that has a greater output capacity and operates with less labor than the existing line. The new line would cost $1 million, have a five-year life, and be depreciated using the MACRS three-year schedule. At the end of five years, the new line could be sold as scrap for $200,000 (in Year 5 dollars). Because the new line is more automated, it would require fewer operators, resulting in a savings of $40,000 per year before tax and unadjusted for inflation (in today’s dollars). Additional sales with the new machine are expected to result in additional net cash inflows, before tax, of $60,000 per year (in today’s dollars). If ACME invests in the new line, a one-time investment of $10,000 in additional working capital will be required. The working capital investment will be recovered at the end of the project’s life. The tax rate is 28 percent, the opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent, and the annual rate of inflation is 3 percent. What is the NPV of the new production line?

11.37 The alternative to investing in the new production line in Problem 11.36 is to overhaul the existing line, which currently has both a book value and a salvage value of $0. It would cost $300,000 to overhaul the existing line, but this expenditure would extend its useful life to five years. The line would have a $0 salvage value at the end of five years. The overhaul outlay would be capitalized and depreciated using the MACRS three-year schedule. Should ACME replace or renovate the existing line?

11.38 Paye’s Panes manufactures insulated windowpanes. The company’s CFO has asked you to assess a new manufacturing plant she is considering. The initial cost will be $475,000. While for tax purposes the plant can be depreciated straight-line to zero book value over 10 years, the CFO expects that the firm will sell the plant at the end of Year 5. At that time, the CFO estimates that there is a 20 percent chance that the plant can be sold for $80,000, a 30 percent chance it can be sold for $70,000, and a 50 percent chance that it can be sold for $25,000. The initial investment in working capital of $30,000 will be recovered when the machine is sold. Additional revenues from the plant are expected to be $205,000 per year, and additional operating costs will be $73,000 per year. The firm has a marginal tax rate of 23 percent and a 9 percent cost of capital. (a) What is the NPV of the new plant? (b) You complete your analysis and read in the Wall Street Journal that a new process for making insulated window will be available five years from today. You believe that this will lower the Year 5 sales price of the plant dramatically. To the nearest dollar, what is the lowest amount that you can sell the plant for and still recommend to your CFO that she undertake the investment?

CFA Problems
11.39 FITCO is considering the purchase of new equipment. The equipment costs $350,000, and an additional $110,000 is needed to install it. The equipment will be depreciated straight-line to zero over a five-year life. The equipment will generate additional annual revenues of $265,000, and it will have annual cash operating expenses of $83,000. The equipment will be sold for $85,000 after five years. An inventory investment of $73,000 is required during the life of the investment. FITCO has a marginal tax rate of 28 percent, and its cost of capital is 10 percent. What is the project NPV?

$97,449.
$144,723.
$162,767.
$231,371.
11.40 After estimating a project’s NPV, the analyst is advised that the fixed capital outlay will be revised upward by $100,000. The fixed capital outlay is depreciated straight-line over an eight-year life. The tax rate is 25 percent, and the required rate of return is 10 percent. No changes in cash operating revenues, cash operating expenses, or salvage value are expected. What is the effect on the project NPV?

$83,328 decrease.
$73,325 decrease.
$59,988 decrease.
No change.
11.41 When assembling the cash flows to calculate an NPV or IRR, the project’s after-tax interest expenses should be subtracted from the cash flows for:

The NPV calculation, but not the IRR calculation.
The IRR calculation, but not the NPV calculation.
Both the NPV calculation and the IRR calculation.
Neither the NPV calculation nor the IRR calculation.
Sample Test Problems
11.1 You purchased 100 shares of stock in an oil company, Texas Energy, Inc., at $50 per share. The company has 1 million shares outstanding. Ten days later, Texas Energy announced an investment in an oil field in east Texas. The probability that the investment will be successful and generate an NPV of $10 million is 0.2; the probability that the investment will be a failure and generate an NPV of negative $1 million is 0.8. How would you expect the stock price to change upon the company’s announcement of the investment?

11.2 A division of Virginia City Highlands Manufacturing is considering purchasing a machine for $1,500,000 that automates the process of inserting electronic components onto computer motherboards. The annual cost of operating the machine will be $50,000, but it will save the company $370,000 in labor costs each year. The machine will have a useful life of 10 years, and its salvage value in 10 years is estimated to be $300,000. However, for tax purposes the initial purchase price of the machine will be depreciated straight-line to zero. If the marginal corporate tax rate is 21 percent and the appropriate discount rate is 12 percent, what is the NPV of this project?

11.3 After examining the NPV analysis for a potential project that would increase the firm’s output by 5 percent, an analyst’s manager tells the analyst to increase the initial fixed capital outlay in the analysis by $480,000. The initial fixed capital outlay would be fully depreciated on a straight-line basis over a 12-year life, regardless of whether it was increased. If the firm’s average tax rate is 23 percent, its marginal tax rate is 30 percent, and the required rate of return is 10 percent, what is the effect of the adjustment on the project NPV?

11.4 Which of the following are relevant cash flows in the evaluation of a proposal to produce a new product?

Decrease in the cash flows of a substitute product.
Alternative of leasing an existing building that would be used for manufacturing this product.
The cost of a new machine required to produce this product.
Salvage value of the new machine at the end of its useful life.
Increase in net working capital at the beginning of the project’s life.
Cost to develop a product prototype last year.
11.5 Managers of Central Embroidery have decided to purchase a new monogram machine and are considering two alternatives. The first machine costs $100,000 and is expected to last five years. The second machine costs $160,000 and is expected to last eight years. Assume that the opportunity cost of capital is 8 percent. Which machine should Central Embroidery purchase?

11.6 You have inherited an apple orchard and want to sell it in the next four years. An expert in apple orchard valuation has estimated the after-tax cash flow you would receive if you sold at the end of each of the next four years as follows: $1,000,000 if you sell in one year; $1,300,000 if you sell in two years; $1,500,000 if you sell in three years; and $1,600,000 if you sell in four years. Your opportunity cost of capital is 10 percent. When should you sell the orchard?

Ethics Case
Unilever’s Sustainable Living Plan
Sustainability is all the buzz in business and is quickly becoming a mainstream topic. Governments as well as customers have been urging corporations to make themselves sustainable, but what does that mean?


What Is Sustainability?

Sustainability is acting to meet the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. For individuals it is a lifestyle that attempts to reduce an individual’s or society’s use of Earth’s natural resources. The European Union has adopted sustainability as an official policy, urging companies to follow sustainable practices as a means of achieving their corporate social responsibility goals to contribute to a better society and a cleaner environment.

Unilever’s Sustainability Plan

Talking about sustainability is one thing; doing it is another. In late 2010 Unilever took action by unveiling its global Sustainable Living Plan. Launched simultaneously in London, New York, Amsterdam, and New Delhi, the plan would affect all of Unilever’s stakeholders worldwide—customers, suppliers, investors, employees, and the local communities where Unilever products are sold. It’s not unusual for a company to try to reduce its CO2 emissions or to reduce waste and water usage in its own manufacturing facilities. But Unilever’s plan went far beyond its plants. According to the company’s management, more than two-thirds of greenhouse emissions and half the water in Unilever products’ life cycles come from consumer use. Therefore, extending the plan to include consumers was a commitment on an unprecedented scale.

Accomplishing the Company’s Sustainability Goals

Technological advances would enable the firm to achieve some of its sustainability goals. The company was developing products such as laundry detergents that work at lower temperatures and bath soaps that reduce the amount of hot water needed in showers and baths.

Company management intended to accomplish other parts of its plan by requiring that suppliers meet sustainability goals.

Finally, Unilever management planned to meet some goals by changing consumers’ habits. For example, by 2015 Unilever aimed to change the hygiene behavior of 1 billion consumers across Asia, Africa, and Latin America by promoting the benefits of hand washing with soap at key times. Though this may seem rudimentary by Western standards, every year more than 3.5 million children die before age five due to diarrhea and acute respiratory infections. Much of this is from poor hygiene habits.1

Overall, through its ambitious sustainability plan, Unilever management intended to (1) improve the health and well-being of more than 1 billion people; (2) purchase 100 percent of its agricultural raw material from sustainable businesses; and (3) reduce the environmental impact of everything it sells by one-half over the following 10 years while doubling its revenue. The major challenge the company faced was to increase sales without also increasing its environmental footprint. Dave Lewis, president of Unilever America, recognized this dilemma: “We cannot choose between growth and sustainability. We have to do both.”

Critics of the plan pointed out that much of its success depended on changing consumer behavior, which was largely beyond Unilever’s control. Probably more important, critics questioned whether the adoption of the plan would contribute to Unilever’s bottom line. Being green and socially responsible are all well and good, but a public company needs to make money. A company that is not financially successful is not sustainable, good intentions notwithstanding.

Integrating Business Strategy and Sustainability Strategy

What makes Unilever’s plan so intriguing to many is the way it integrates business strategy and sustainability strategy. Let’s take one example: health and hygiene. Unilever claimed it would use its Lifebuoy brand soap to encourage more hand washing in an effort to reduce diarrhea and respiratory diseases spread by germs. It would use its fluoride toothpaste and toothbrush brands to encourage brushing twice a day, which would reduce tooth decay in children by 50 percent compared to brushing once. It would make safe drinking water available to 500 million people through its affordable Pureit in-home water purifier. Through its Dove Social Mission, Unilever intended to use one of its best-known brands to enhance the self-esteem and thus improve the mental health of young women around the world.

Large companies are often criticized by nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). In the past, as a company headquartered in Europe where NGOs are particularly active, Unilever has been a target of such criticism. A common corporate strategy is to fight back. However, with its Sustainable Living Plan, Unilever endorsed many NGO recommendations. For example, Unilever would use eggs from 100 percent cage-free chickens in all of its products—a common demand from animal rights NGOs. All Lipton tea would be purchased from Rainforest Alliance certified suppliers. Even Ben and Jerry’s ice cream would be made from ingredients that are fair-trade certified.

In rural India, Unilever planned to link 500,000 small farmers into a unified supply network to improve their farming practices. The farmers would be required to adhere to Unilever’s Sustainable Agriculture Code and for the first time would benefit from economies of scale that could improve their lives. What’s in it for Unilever? Relationships with a vastly expanded network of sustainable suppliers producing products at competitive prices. Building an adequate source of supplies is especially critical in a world where food shortages may become more common.

Critical Concerns and Responses

Is Unilever simply using the sustainability mantra as a device to increase its profits? To its critics, Unilever’s motives are suspect. They claim it is pursuing sustainability, not because it is the right thing to do, but because it is good business. But are these two goals mutually exclusive? Can a firm’s strategy seek to be profitable and sustainable? What’s wrong with doing well by doing good? Nothing, according to Unilever management. They intend to lead the way in being a profitable, sustainable corporation.

Discussion Questions
Should Unilever’s stockholders endorse a sustainability plan? Why or why not?
Are there business advantages to using sustainable or green suppliers? If so, what are they? If not, do you think a traditional return on investment analysis captures all possible benefits of going green?
Are there any ethical criticisms of Unilever’s sustainable living strategy? If so, what are they?
Sources: (1) http://www.sustainable-living.unilever.com/, (2) www.unilever.com/sustainable-living/improving-health-and-well-being/health-and-hygiene/, (3) .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sustainable_living (4) www.epa.gov/sustainability
Notes
1 The concept of opportunity cost here is similar to that discussed in Chapter 10 as it relates to the cost of capital.
2 As discussed in Chapter 2, if we multiply the two terms on the right-hand side of Equation 11.3, we get 1 + k = 1 + ΔPe + r + ΔPer. Since the last term in this equation, ΔPer, is the product of two fractions, it is a very small number and is often ignored in practice. Without this term, Equation 11.3 becomes 1 + k = 1 + ΔPe + r or k = ΔPe + r.
3 Note that when we use the term cost of capital without distinguishing between the nominal and the real cost of capital, we are referring to the nominal cost of capital. This is the convention that is used in practice. In this example, we use the term nominal or real whenever we refer to the cost of capital for clarity. In the rest of this book, however, we follow convention by simply using the term cost of capital to refer to the nominal cost of capital.
4 Although some assets that were acquired before 1986 are still being depreciated using earlier methods, the vast majority of depreciation for existing assets and all depreciation for new assets are based on MACRS.
5 Under GAAP accounting rules, if the salvage value can be estimated with reasonable certainty, it should be used in computing depreciation. However, in practice the expected salvage value of a new capital asset is so often uncertain that it is typically assumed to equal $0 even for financial reporting purposes.
6 Including the tax savings as negative capital expenditure increases the FCF in Year 10 since we subtract all capital expenditures.
7 For simplicity, the dollar values in Exhibit 11.9 and the associated calculations are reported in thousands.
8 In some instances, costs are “fixed” in the short run but variable in the long run. For example, if a firm leases manufacturing space under a long-term contract, it may not be possible to reduce the lease expense immediately if demand for the firm’s products falls. However, it will be possible to do so at the expiration of the lease or by sub-leasing excess space.
9 If you don’t expect to replace the machines as they wear out (for instance, if you plan to quit the mowing business in one year), then you can calculate the NPV of each mower, including the salvage values that you expect to realize for each at the end of the year, and choose the mower with the larger NPV.
10 We could have also calculated the NPV for Model B by discounting the $500 annual electricity savings by 10 percent and adding the present value of that savings stream to the $50,000 initial cost. Using this NPV in the EAC formula would also yield −$6,838.16.
1 Studies by Unilever have shown that hand washing at key hygienic occasions can reduce diarrheal disease by 25 percent, respiratory infection by 19 percent, and eye infections by 46 percent.